<doc id="11260" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11260" title="Relax (song)">
Relax (song)

"Relax" is the debut single by Frankie Goes to Hollywood, released in the United Kingdom by ZTT Records in 1983. The song was later included on the album "Welcome to the Pleasuredome" (1984).
Although fairly inauspicious upon initial release, "Relax" finally reached number one on the UK singles chart on 22 January 1984, ultimately becoming one of the most controversial and most commercially successful records of the decade. The single eventually sold a reported 2 million copies in the UK alone, making it the seventh best-selling single in the UK Singles Chart's history. Following the release of the group's second single, "Two Tribes", "Relax" rallied from a declining UK chart position during June 1984 to climb back up the UK charts and re-attain the number 2 spot behind "Two Tribes" at number 1, making them the only act at the time to have occupied the top two simultaneously apart from the Beatles and John Lennon.
Upon its release in the United States, "Relax" repeated its slow UK progress. In its initial release, it peaked at number 67 in May 1984. In January 1985, it re-entered the Billboard Hot 100 at number 70, eventually reaching number 10 in March.
The song won Best British Single at the 1985 Brit Awards.
The song featured on the soundtrack of the films "Body Double" and "T2 Trainspotting", in the game ' in the fictional in-game radio station Wave 103, and on the soundtrack to '.
Singer Holly Johnson has claimed that the words of the song came to him as he was walking down Princess Avenue in Liverpool: "I mean they were just, you know, words that floated into my head one day when I was walking down Princess Avenue (in Liverpool) with no bus fare, trying to get to rehearsals – I mean there was no great sort of calculated, 'Oh I'll sing these words and this record’ll be banned'."
ZTT Records signed Frankie Goes to Hollywood after producer-turned-ZTT cofounder Trevor Horn saw the band play on the television show "The Tube", on which the group played an early version of "Relax". Horn described the original version of "Relax" as "More a jingle than a song", but he preferred to work with songs that were not professionally finished because he could then "fix them up" in his own style. Once the band was signed, ZTT co-founder Paul Morley mapped out the marketing campaign fashioned as a "strategic assault on pop". Morley opted to tackle the biggest possible themes in the band's singles ("sex, war, religion"), of which "Relax" would be the first, and emphasized the shock impact of Frankie members Holly Johnson's and Paul Rutherford's open homosexuality in the packaging and music videos.
Horn dominated the recording of "Relax" in his effort for perfectionism. The band were overawed and intimidated by Horn's reputation, and thus were too nervous to make suggestions. Johnson said in his autobiography, "Whatever he said we went along with". When attempts to record with the full band proved unsatisfactory, Horn hired former Ian Dury backing band the Blockheads for the sessions, with Norman Watt-Roy providing the original bass line. Those sessions were later deemed to be not modern sounding enough. Horn then constructed a more electronic-based version of the song with keyboards by session musician Andy Richards and with rhythm programming assistance from J. J. Jeczalik of Art of Noise. Horn developed this version of the recording in his west London studio while the band remained in their hometown of Liverpool. Horn had made 3 versions of "Relax" prior to Richards and guitarist Stephen Lipson joining his ZTT Production 'Theam' in late 1983. Horn left the studio late one night asking for Lipson to erase the multitrack (of version 3) due to lack of progress, but came back into the studio some time later to hear Richards playing a variety of modal chords based around the key of E minor with Lipson playing guitar along to the unerased multitrack. Ultimately lead vocalist Johnson was the only band member to perform on the record; the only contribution by the other members was a sample crafted from the sound of the rest of the band jumping into a swimming pool. Horn explained years later, "I was just... Look, 'Relax' "had" to be a hit." Despite the band's absence from the record, Horn said, "I could never have done these records in isolation. There was no actual playing by the band, but the whole "feeling" came from the band." Horn completed the recording having spent £70,000 in studio time.
Morley intentionally courted scandal with the promotion of "Relax". ZTT initiated the ad campaign for "Relax" with two quarter-page ads in the British music press. The first ad featured images of Rutherford in a sailor cap and a leather vest, and Johnson with a shaved head and rubber gloves. The images were accompanied by the phrase "ALL THE NICE BOYS LOVE SEA MEN", a pun on the music hall song "All the Nice Girls love a Sailor". It declared "Frankie Goes to Hollywood are coming ... making Duran Duran lick the shit off their shoes ... Nineteen inches that must be taken always." The second ad promised "theories of bliss, a history of Liverpool from 1963 to 1983, a guide to Amsterdam bars".
When first released in November 1983, the initial progress of "Relax" on the UK Top 75 was sluggish. First charting at number 67, by its seventh week on the chart it had progressed only to number 35, even falling back slightly during that time. But then on Thursday 5 January 1984, Frankie Goes to Hollywood performed "Relax" on the BBC flagship television chart show, "Top of the Pops". The following week it soared to number 6. On 11 January 1984, Radio 1 disc jockey Mike Read expressed on air his distaste for both the record's suggestive sleeve (designed by Anne Yvonne Gilbert) and its lyrics, which centred on the oft-repeated "Relax, don't do it/When you want to sock it to it/Relax, don't do it/ When you want to come." He announced his refusal to play the record, not knowing that the BBC had just decided that the song was not to be played on the BBC anyway. Holly Johnson contends that the lyrics were misheard, instead of, when you want to sock it to it, he sang, when you want to suck, chew it, contending he wrote and should know.
In support of their disc jockey, BBC Radio banned the single from its shows a reported two days later (although certain prominent night-time BBC shows – including those of Kid Jensen and John Peel – continued to play the record, as they saw fit, throughout 1984). The now-banned "Relax" rose to number 2 in the charts by 17 January, and hit the number-one spot on 24 January. By this time, the BBC Radio ban had extended to "Top of the Pops" as well, which displayed a still picture of the group during its climactic Number One announcement, before airing a performance by a non-Number One artist.
This went on for the five weeks that "Relax" was at number one. It then began a slow decline on the charts, falling back as far as number 31 in May 1984 before returning to number two in July whilst Frankie's follow-up single "Two Tribes" held the UK number-one spot. In the end, "Relax" remained on the Top 75 for 48 consecutive weeks and returned in February 1985 for four more, giving a total of 52.
The ban became an embarrassment for the BBC, especially given that UK commercial radio and television stations were still playing the song. Later in 1984 the ban was lifted and "Relax" featured on both the Christmas Day edition of "Top of the Pops" and Radio 1's rundown of the best-selling singles of the year.
Throughout the "Relax" controversy, the band continued to publicly deny that the song's lyrics were sexual. Nevertheless, by 1984, it was clear that the public were aware of the sexual nature of the lyrics, but the scandal had fuelled sales anyway. In 1985, with the release of the "Welcome to the Pleasuredome" album (which included "Relax"), the band dropped any public pretense about the lyrics: 
The track was reissued in September 1993, the first of a string of Frankie Goes to Hollywood singles to be reissued that year. It debuted at a high number six on the UK singles chart and peaked at number five the next week. It spent seven weeks on the Top 75 this time, thus extending its combined total to 59, making it the third longest runner of all time (seven other singles have since surpassed it; now it is in joint 10th place).
Although the 7-inch version of the single remained unchanged throughout its initial release (a mix generally known as "Relax (Move)"), promotional 7-inch records featuring a substantially different mix of "Relax" (entitled either "The Last Seven Inches" or "Warp Mix" because it is a compilation of other versions) were the subject of a limited 1984 release.
Three principal 12-inch remixes of "Relax" were eventually created by producer Trevor Horn:
One of the reasons we did all the remixes was that the initial 12-inch version of 'Relax' contained something called 'The Sex Mix', which was 16 minutes long and didn't even contain a song. It was really Holly Johnson just jamming, as well as a bunch of samples of the group jumping in the swimming pool and me sort of making disgusting noises by dropping stuff into buckets of water! We got so many complaints about it — particularly from gay clubs, who found it offensive — that we cut it in half and reduced it down to eight minutes, by taking out some of the slightly more offensive parts [this became "Sex Mix (Edition 2)"]. Then we got another load of complaints, because the single version wasn't on the 12-inch — I didn't see the point in this at the time, but I was eventually put straight about it.
Horn attested that visits to New York's Paradise Garage club led to the creation of the final "Relax (New York Mix)", which ultimately replaced the original "Sex Mix" releases:
It was only when I went to this club and heard the sort of things they were playing that I really understood about 12-inch remixes. Although I myself had already had a couple of big 12-inch hits, I'd never heard them being played on a big sound system, and so I then went back and mixed 'Relax' again and that was the version which sold a couple of million over here [in the UK].
The original 12-inch version of "Relax", labelled "Sex Mix", ran for over 16 minutes, and is broadly as described by Horn above. The subsequent "Edition 2" was an 8-minute-plus edit of the "Sex Mix", and can only be distinguished by having "12ISZTAS1" etched on the vinyl. The final 12-inch mix, containing no elements from the foregoing versions, was designated the "New York Mix", and ran for approximately 7:20. This was the most commonly available 12-inch version of "Relax" during its worldwide 1984 chart success.
The UK cassette single featured "Greatest Bits", a unique amalgam of excerpts from the "Sex Mix", "New York Mix", "Move" and an instrumental version of "Move".
Since virtually all of the UK "Relax" 12-inch singles were labelled "Sex Mix", a method of differentiating between versions by reference to the record's matrix numbers necessarily became "de rigueur" for collectors of Frankie Goes to Hollywood releases (and ultimately collectors of ZTT records in general).
"Relax (Come Fighting)" was the version of the song included on the "Welcome to the Pleasuredome" album. This is ostensibly a variant of the 7-inch single "Move" mix, but is different from that version. For example, the "7" mix fades in on a foghorn type sound while the album mix fades in on sustained synth chords. Also, the backing vocals of the 7" mix are panned to the left, whereas they are mixed in the centre on the album version. Additionally, the 7" mix features a prominent reverberated kick drum sound during the introduction that also appears in other parts of the song, which is completely absent from the album mix. The album mix also has a certain post-production sheen (greater stereo separation of parts, more strategic uses of reverb, etc.) that is absent from the original 1983 7-inch single mix. The "Classic 1993 Version" is a version of the original 7" mix that uses "Bonus, Again" as the instrumental track, although modification with elements from "Come Fighting" thrown in (e.g. both the intro and outro come directly from it) and much of it made more clearer.
The original airing of Relax on The Tube, before the band were signed to ZTT, featured another verse that was edited from all the released versions, "In heaven everything is fine, you've got yours and I've got mine", presumably removed as it was taken directly from the David Lynch film "Eraserhead".
According to a fan enquiry by a member of the Alternate forum (a forum decided to ZTT) to Holly Johnson over accusation that "Edition 2" was created by a DJ, "Edition 2" was edited by Trevor Horn at the SARM East studio with JJ Jeczalik as engineer and Holly watching.
The 7-inch featured "One September Monday", an interview between ZTT's Paul Morley, Holly Johnson and Paul Rutherford. During the interview, Holly revealed that the group's name derived from a page of the "New Yorker" magazine, headlined "Frankie Goes Hollywood" and featuring Frank Sinatra "getting mobbed by teenyboppers".
On all of the original 12-inch releases, the B-side featured a cover of "Ferry 'Cross the Mersey", followed by a brief dialogue involving Rutherford attempting to sign on, and an a cappella version of the title track's chorus, segueing into an instrumental version of "Relax", known as "Bonus, Again" (which resembles "Come Fighting" more than the 7" mix).
The UK cassette single included "Ferry 'Cross the Mersey" and interview sections not included on "One September Monday".
The first official video for "Relax", directed by Bernard Rose and set in an S&M themed gay nightclub, featuring the bandmembers accosted by buff leathermen, a glamorous drag queen, and an obese admirer dressed up as a Roman emperor, was allegedly banned by MTV and the BBC, prompting the recording of a second video, directed by Godley and Creme in early 1984, featuring the group performing with the help of laser beams. However, after the second video was made the song was banned completely by the BBC, meaning that neither video was ever broadcast on any BBC music programmes.
A live performance video of the song was directed by David Mallet, making the rounds at MTV.
Another MTV video of the studio version includes footage from the Brian De Palma film "Body Double". "Body Double", a popular 1984 erotic thriller film, contains a film within a film sequence in which Frankie Goes to Hollywood performs "Relax" on the set of a porn film.
The title track has periodically been reissued as a single in a number of remix forms.

</doc>
<doc id="11261" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11261" title="Two Tribes">
Two Tribes

"Two Tribes" is an anti-war song by British band Frankie Goes to Hollywood, released in the UK by ZTT Records on 4 June 1984. The song was later included on the album "Welcome to the Pleasuredome". Presenting a nihilistic, gleeful lyric expressing enthusiasm for nuclear war, it juxtaposes a relentless pounding bass line and guitar riff inspired by American funk and R&B pop with influences of Russian classical music, in an opulent arrangement produced by Trevor Horn.
The single was a phenomenal success in the UK, helped by a wide range of remixes and supported by an advertising campaign depicting the band as members of the Red Army. It entered the charts at number one on 10 June 1984 and stayed at the top of the UK Singles Chart for nine consecutive weeks, during which time the group's previous single "Relax" climbed back up the charts to number two. It was the longest-running number-one single in the UK of the 1980s. It has sold 1.58 million copies in the UK as of November 2012. Songwriters Johnson, Gill and O'Toole received the 1984 Ivor Novello award for Best Song Musically and Lyrically. In 2015 the song was voted by the British public as the nation's 14th-favourite 1980s number one in a poll for ITV.
A version of "Two Tribes" was originally recorded for a BBC John Peel session in October 1982. The session version makes clear that the basic structure of the song, including its signature bass-line, percussion arrangement and idiosyncratic introductory and middle eight sections, were already intact prior to any involvement from ZTT or eventual producer Trevor Horn.
Johnson also noted: "There's two elements in the music — an American funk line and a Russian line. It's the most obvious demonstration of two tribes that we have today." To accentuate the musical tension, Horn arranged the 'Russian' segments as a dramatic string arrangement. The driving funk/rock rhythm section was played on synthesisers.
The single was released at a time when the Cold War had intensified and fears about global nuclear warfare were at a peak. Although Johnson would attest in a 1984 radio interview that the "two tribes" of the song potentially represented any pair of warring adversaries (giving the examples of "cowboys and Indians or Captain Kirk and Klingons"), the line "On the air America/I modelled shirts by Van Heusen" is a clear reference to then US President Ronald Reagan. Reagan had advertised for Phillips Van Heusen in 1953 (briefly reviving the association in the early 1980s). The title of his first film had been "Love Is on the Air".
The lyric "working for the black gas" is, according to Johnson, "About oil surpassing gold. How you might as well be paid in petrol." And the line "Are we living in a land where sex and horror are the new gods?" was inspired by the 1959 British film "Cover Girl Killer". Johnson explained, "The TV was on in the background while I was doing me ironing and suddenly this character came out with that statement." (The actual dialogue, which occurs at about 48 minutes 24 seconds into the film, is "Surely sex and horror are the new gods in this polluted world of so-called entertainment?")
The track featured snippets of narration from actor Patrick Allen, recreating his narration from the British "Protect and Survive" public information films about how to survive a nuclear war. (The original "Protect and Survive" soundtracks were sampled for the 7-inch mixes.)
The 12-inch A- and B-sides featured voice parts by British actor Chris Barrie imitating Ronald Reagan. Barrie also voiced the Reagan puppet on "Spitting Image". Barrie's parts as 'Reagan' included praise for the band, as well as parts of Adolf Hitler's speech to a court after the Beer Hall Putsch: "You may pronounce us guilty a thousand times over, but the Goddess of the Eternal Court of History will smile and tear to tatters the brief of the State Prosecutor and the sentence of this court, for She acquits us." Barrie also voiced the last sentence of "History Will Absolve Me" (Spanish: "La historia me absolverá") which is the concluding sentence and subsequent title of a four-hour speech made by Fidel Castro on 16 October 1953. Castro made the speech in his own defense in court against the charges brought against him after leading an attack on the Moncada Barracks on 26 July 1953. Barrie would return for the band's next single, "The Power of Love", imitating Mike Read in a parody of the DJ's ban on their previous single, "Relax".
The song's title derives from the line "when two great warrior tribes go to war", from the film "Mad Max 2" (the line is also spoken by Holly Johnson at the beginning of the session version).
ZTT aggressively marketed the single in terms of its topical political angle, promoting it with images of the group wearing American military garb in combat, as well as Soviet-style army uniforms set against an American urban backdrop.
The original cover art featured a Soviet mural of Vladimir Lenin in St Petersburg, and images of Reagan and then-UK Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher. The sleeve notes, attributed to ZTT's Paul Morley, dispassionately reported details of the relative nuclear arsenals of each superpower.
The song appeared in the form of six mixes, including "Annihilation", "Carnage", "Hibakusha", "Cowboys and Indians", "We Don't Want to Die" and "For The Victims Of Ravishment".
The first 12-inch mix ("Annihilation") started with an air-raid siren, and included advice from Allen about how to tag and dispose of family members should they die in the fallout shelter (taken from the public information film "Casualties"). This version appeared on CD editions of the album. "Annihilation" was the basis for the "Hibakusha" mix, which was originally released in a limited edition, and appears on the Japanese-only 1985 album "Bang!".
"For The Victims Of Ravishment" appeared on the LP and cassette editions of the album "Welcome To The Pleasuredome". It is the shortest version, at 3:27 minutes. This mix derived from the "Carnage" mix, which prominently featured strings as well as vocal samples from Allen and the group's B-side interview.
Since 1984, "Two Tribes" has been re-issued several times, generally involving third-party remixes bearing little relation to the original releases in terms of either structure or character.
The 7-inch featured "One February Friday", an interview between Morley and the group's three musicians, Mark O'Toole, Brian Nash and Peter Gill, over an otherwise untitled instrumental track. A similar track had been included on the B-side of "Relax", with the title "One September Monday".
The principal B-side to the original 12-inch single was a cover version of "War", which became the subject of an extended remix (subtitled "Hidden") on the single's third UK 12-inch release, where it was promoted as a double A-side with "Carnage".
The UK cassette single featured a cut-together combination of "Surrender", "Carnage" and "Annihilation", plus Reagan snippets and interview sections not included on any other release.
The Godley & Creme-directed video depicted a wrestling match between then-US President Ronald Reagan and then-Soviet General Secretary Konstantin Chernenko in front of group members and an assembly of representatives from the world's nations. The match eventually degenerates into global destruction. Certain violent moments ("Reagan" is seen, for example, biting "Chernenko's" ear) were edited from the version shown on MTV.
A longer version of the video (based on the "Hibakusha" mix) included an introductory, heavily edited monologue by Richard Nixon taken from an ad from his 1960 US Presidential campaign ("No ... firm diplomacy ... No ... peace for America and the world"), plus similar contributions from other world leaders, including Lord Beaverbrook, Yasser Arafat and John F. Kennedy. The complete soundtrack to the extended video was eventually released as "Two Tribes (Video Destructo)" on the German version of the "Twelve Inches" compilation. A third version of the video, included on the band's "From An Wasteland to an Artificial Paradise" VHS, retains the introduction, but omits most of the inserted clips in the main wrestling sequence.
All discographical information pertains to the original UK single release only.
The A-side mix is commonly referred as "Cowboys and Indians" to avoid confusion with other mixes, as ZTT commonly gives the sides on singles separate names. Thus, "One February Friday" is sometimes subtitled as either "Doctors and Nurses" (as per the regular 7") or "Only Bullets Can Stop Them Now" (as per the picture disc B-side label).
The A-side is an alternative mix to the regular 7" (subtitled "We Don't Want To Die" on the B-side label). A common theory within many fans is that "We Don't Want To Die" is essentially "Surrender" with vocals.
Also issued as a regular 7" in Canada.
"Extended Version" is the same as "Annihilation".
"Two Tribes" on the B-side is the 7" picture disc mix.
"New York Mix" was mislabeled as "U.S mix".
"Keep The Peace" is a combination of Surrender, Carnage and Annihilation.
"Hibakush-ah!" is an early version of "Hibakusha".

</doc>
<doc id="11262" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11262" title="The Power of Love">
The Power of Love

The Power of Love or Power of Love may refer to:

</doc>
<doc id="11263" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11263" title="Welcome to the Pleasuredome (song)">
Welcome to the Pleasuredome (song)

"Welcome to the Pleasuredome" is the title track to the 1984 debut album by Frankie Goes to Hollywood. The lyrics of the song were inspired by the poem "Kubla Khan" by Samuel Taylor Coleridge.
In March 1985, the album track was substantially abridged and remixed for release as the group's fourth UK single.
While criticized at the time of release and afterward for being a song that glorifies debauchery, the lyrics (and video) make clear that the point of the song, just as Coleridge's poem, is about the "dangers" of this kind of lifestyle. This song, along with "Relax", made Frankie Goes to Hollywood even more controversial than they already were.
Despite the group's record label (ZTT) pre-emptively promoting the single as "their fourth number one", an achievement that would have set a new UK record for consecutive number one singles by a debuting artist, "Welcome to the Pleasuredome" peaked at number two in the UK singles chart, being kept off the top spot by the Phil Collins/Philip Bailey duet "Easy Lover". The single spent a total of eleven weeks on the UK chart.
It was the first release by the group not to reach number one and, despite representing a creditable success in its own right, it symbolically confirmed the end of the chart invincibility that the group had enjoyed during 1984. Frankie Goes to Hollywood would not release another record for seventeen months, and they would ultimately fail to emulate their past glories upon their return.
The spoken-word introductions to both 12-inch mixes are adapted from Walter Kaufmann's 1967 translation of Friedrich Nietzsche's "The Birth of Tragedy". The recitation on the first 12-inch ("Real Altered") is by Gary Taylor, whilst that on the second 12-inch ("Fruitness") and the cassette is by actor Geoffrey Palmer. It is unknown whether Palmer's concluding "Welcome To The Pleasured"r"ome" was a genuine mistake or a deliberately scripted one.
This is the only single from the group that was not released on a CD single at that time, the other being "Watching The Wildlife". "Relax", "Two Tribes", "The Power of Love" and "Rage Hard+" all saw a CD-maxi release in Germany at the end of the '80s. "Welcome to the Pleasuredome" was not given such a release. However, the 7" vinyl single was released in two different mixes, and it was purely random as to which one you ended up with, as both mixes were in identical sleeve designs and carried the same catalogue number. Not only that, but the subtitle used to identify different mixes was identical on both record labels, with only the matrix number on the run out groove giving the game away. The first 7" (matrix 7 A 1 U) carried the normal 7" single mix, which was guitar driven. However, the "secret" alternative mix (matrix 7 A 7 U or 7 A 8 U) was quite different, and featured on the Apple shaped Picture Disc. The subtitle for that disc was 'alternative reel' but on the 7" single the subtitle remained unchanged as 'altered real'. 
In fact, although appearing to be identical sleeves, the two mixes were actually released in slightly different ones. The standard 7" mix came in a thick paper sleeve, whereas the "secret" one came in a thin paper sleeve.
All releases featured an edited version of "Get It On", originally recorded for a BBC Radio 1 session in 1983 (a full-length version was included on the cassette release), plus a faded or full length version of "Happy Hi!", a non-album track.
Both "Relax (International)" and "Born To Run" are live recordings (with some minor overdubs), based on an actual live appearance on "The Tube's" "Europe A-Go-Go" in Newcastle during early January 1985.
The video, by Bernard Rose, features the group stealing a car, going to a carnival and encountering all manner of deceptively "pleasureable" activities. The audio soundtrack of the video was included as part of the cassette single.
Three edits were made, the regular 4:55 version with the regular 7" mix, a 5:45 version matching what was included on the cassette single and a 7:52 version with a longer, different intro.
In 1984, a few months prior to the album's release, an early instrumental version of the album track was issued as a promotional 12-inch single, entitled "Welcome to the Pleasuredome (Pleasure Fix)", along with a similar early instrumental of "The Only Star in Heaven" (subtitled "Star Fix"). These tracks were subsequently given wider release as part of the B-side to the second 12-inch of "The Power of Love" single.
"Welcome to the Pleasuredome" was also used on several promotional records in the USA during 1985, featuring the following tracks in various combinations:
The track has periodically been reissued as a single, including during 1993 and 2000. Although these releases have some admirers, and have usefully made available various original mixes on CD for the first time, the accompanying A-side remixes by contemporary DJs have tended on the whole to bear little or no comparison to the spirit of the originals.
Reissues in the group's name have also tended to shun any overt reference to the identity of the original artists, and the reissue artwork has notably featured no images of the group. It has been suggested that this situation may relate to Johnson's successful but acrimonious court case against ZTT in 1989, which freed him (and effectively the other group members) from their unfair contract with the label.
1993 reissues
Track 4 is mislabeled. It's the "Real Altered" version from 12 ZTAS 7.
2000 reissues
2014 reissues
The instrumental "Into Battle Mix" appears on the soundtrack to the film "Toys", specifically utilized whenever the Tommy Tanks appeared.

</doc>
<doc id="11264" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11264" title="Rage Hard">
Rage Hard

"Rage Hard" is the fifth single by Frankie Goes to Hollywood. It was released on 25 August 1986.
Having topped the charts around the world with "Welcome to the Pleasuredome" and its accompanying singles, Frankie Goes to Hollywood took off to Amsterdam to record the follow-up album, "Liverpool". Taking on a rockier edge, "Rage Hard" was the first single culled from the disc.
Of note, "Rage Hard" was a testament to the changing musical landscape in Britain at the time. It was not only the first Frankie single to be featured on CD single, it was also the first single to not feature a cassette release - new rules limited the number of items that could count towards the official charts, following the earlier ZTT excesses.
"Rage Hard" eventually hit Number 4 in the UK singles charts and Number 1 in Germany (for two weeks), #5 in Switzerland, #7 in the Netherlands, #12 in Austria, #19 in Sweden and #32 in France.
The B-sides to "Rage Hard" were, for the most part, straight forward cover songs. Firstly there was a cover of David Bowie's 1972 glam-rock classic "Suffragette City", slightly renamed to "SuffRAGEtte City" to fit in with the "Rage Hard" promotion. The second cover song was "Roadhouse Blues" by The Doors which featured on the 2nd 12". A shorter version features on the CD single.
The original B-side is an odd composition entitled "(Don't Lose What's Left) Of Your Little Mind". It was released in two versions, a 4-minute mix and a 6-minute mix and featured Holly Johnson & Brian (Nasher) Nash imitating Count von Count ("Ha ha ha/I am the Count") from the children's TV show "Sesame Street". This was complemented by sampled burps and belches over a backing track.
"rage rage"
 (All discographical information pertains to UK releases only)
"Slam Bam"
Tracks 1 and 3.1 was rereleased in 2012 on CD Sexmix Disk 1, Tracks 14 and 15.
In 1993, a version of the song appeared on the b side of The Power Of Love reissue (FGTH 3) entitled "Original DJ mix". This version is the original 7" mix from 1986, but with the first chorus removed. Instead, the first verse and second verse are jointed together. This release can also be found on a large centre hole 7" disc with the label details stamped into the naked vinyl, as opposed to a paper or printed label.

</doc>
<doc id="11267" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11267" title="Liverpool (album)">
Liverpool (album)

Liverpool is Frankie Goes to Hollywood's second and final studio album, released in October 1986. It would be the band's final album of all-new material, and lead singer Holly Johnson would leave the band following the corresponding world tour, followed by a flurry of lawsuits from ZTT. The album's production was handled by Trevor Horn's engineer Stephen Lipson, who urged the band to play their own instruments on this album (Horn having replaced many of the band's performances and arrangements with his session musicians or his own performances on "Welcome to the Pleasuredome"). "Liverpool" therefore features a heavier rock sound than its predecessor. 
The album was a commercial disappointment compared to the band's previous effort, though it charted generally high at No. 5 in the United Kingdom and Germany, No. 7 on the Austrian and Swiss music charts and No. 8 in Norway. The cover photo was different depending on what format was purchased (LP, cassette, or compact disc). It also produced the top 5 single "Rage Hard" (No. 1 in Germany), top 20 single "Warriors of the Wasteland" and top 30 single "Watching the Wildlife".
All songs Gill/Johnson/Nash/O'Toole unless otherwise stated.
The 2000 German reissues includes two bonus tracks:
In 2011, a remastered deluxe edition of "Liverpool" was released, featuring a second disc containing rare and previously unreleased material. The first CD contains the LP version of the original album with extra tracks and the second CD rare and unreleased tracks. A few tracks were removed off later issues due to complainants by the band members. Issues with those tracks are "number 15 in the Element Series", and those without are "number 19 in the Element Series".
CD1
CD2
Additional personnel

</doc>
<doc id="11273" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11273" title="Faroese language">
Faroese language

Faroese ( or ; , ) is a North Germanic language spoken as a first language by about 72,000 Faroe Islanders, around 49,000 of whom reside on the Faroe Islands and 23,000 in other areas, mainly Denmark. 
It is one of five languages descended from Old West Norse spoken in the Middle Ages, the others being Norwegian, Icelandic, and the extinct Norn and Greenlandic Norse. Faroese and Icelandic, its closest extant relative, are not mutually intelligible in speech, but the written languages resemble each other quite closely, largely owing to Faroese's etymological orthography.
Around 900, the language spoken in the Faroes was Old Norse, which Norse settlers had brought with them during the time of the settlement of Faroe Islands () that began in 825. However, many of the settlers were not from Scandinavia, but descendants of Norse settlers in the Irish Sea region. In addition, women from Norse Ireland, Orkney, or Shetland often married native Scandinavian men before settling in the Faroe Islands and Iceland. As a result, the Irish language has had some influence on both Faroese and Icelandic. 
There is some debatable evidence of Irish language place names in the Faroes: for example, the names of Mykines, Stóra Dímun, Lítla Dímun and Argir have been hypothesized to contain Celtic roots. Other examples of early-introduced words of Celtic origin are: / (buttermilk), cf. Middle Irish ; (tail-piece of an animal), cf. Middle Irish ; (head, headhair), cf. Middle Irish ; (hand, paw), cf. Middle Irish ; (bull), cf. Middle Irish ; and (pasture in the outfield), cf. Middle Irish .
Between the 9th and the 15th centuries, a distinct Faroese language evolved, although it was probably still mutually intelligible with Old West Norse, and remained similar to the Norn language of Orkney and Shetland during Norn's earlier phase.
Faroese ceased to be a written language after the union of Norway with Denmark in 1380, with Danish replacing Faroese as the language of administration and education. The islanders continued to use the language in ballads, folktales, and everyday life. This maintained a rich spoken tradition, but for 300 years the language was not used in written form.
In 1823, the Danish Bible Society published a diglot of the Gospel of Matthew, with Faroese on the left and Danish on the right.
Venceslaus Ulricus Hammershaimb and the Icelandic grammarian and politician Jón Sigurðsson published a written standard for Modern Faroese in 1854, which still exists. They set a standard for the orthography of the language, based on its Old Norse roots and similar to that of Icelandic. The main purpose of this was for the spelling to represent the diverse dialects of Faroese in equal measure. Additionally, it had the advantages of being etymologically clear and keeping the kinship with the Icelandic written language. The actual pronunciation, however, often differs considerably from the written rendering. The letter "ð", for example, has no specific phoneme attached to it.
Jakob Jakobsen devised a rival system of orthography, based on his wish for a phonetic spelling, but this system was never taken up by the speakers.
In 1908, Scripture Gift Mission published the Gospel of John in Faroese.
In 1937, Faroese replaced Danish as the official school language, in 1938, as the church language, and in 1948, as the national language by the Home Rule Act of the Faroe Islands. However, Faroese did not become the common language of media and advertising until the 1980s. Today, Danish is considered a foreign language, although around 5% of residents on the Faroes learn it as a first language, and it is taught in school from the first grade.
In 2017, the tourist board Visit Faroe Islands launched the Faroe Islands Translate, available in 13 languages including English, Chinese, Russian, Japanese, and Portuguese.
Old Faroese (, ca. mid-14th to mid-16th centuries) is a form of Old Norse spoken in medieval times in the Faroe Islands. The language shares many features with both Old Icelandic and Old Norwegian; Old Norwegian appears closer to Old Faroese, whereas Old Icelandic remained rather archaic compared to other medieval varieties of Old West Norse. The most crucial aspects of the development of Faroese are diphthongisation and palatalisation.
There is not enough data available to establish an accurate chronology of Faroese, but a rough one may be developed through comparison to the chronologies of Old Icelandic and Old Norwegian. In the 12th/13th centuries, "á" and "ǫ́" merged as ; later on at the beginning of the 14th century, delabialization took place: "y", "øy", "au" > /i, ɔi, ɛi/; "í" and "ý" merged in addition to "i" and "y", but in the case of "í" and "ý", it appears that labialisation took place instead as is documented by later development to . Further, the language underwent a palatalisation of "k", "g" and "sk" before Old Norse "e", "i", "y", "ø", "au" > > > . Before the palatalisation "é" and "ǽ" merged as and approximately in the same period epenthetic "u" is inserted into word-final and clusters. 
A massive quantity shift also operated in Middle Faroese. In the case of "skerping", it took place after delabialization but before loss of post-vocalic "ð" and "g" . The shift of "hv" to , the deletion of in (remaining) word-initial –sonorant clusters ("hr", "hl", "hn" > "r", "l", "n"), and the dissolution of "þ" ("þ" > "t"; "þ" > "h" in demonstrative pronouns and adverbs) appeared before the end of the 13th century. Another undated change is the merger of "ǫ", "ø" and "ǿ" into ; pre-nasal "ǫ", "ǫ́" > "o", "ó". "enk", "eng" probably became , in the 14th century; the development of "a" to before "ng", "nk" appeared after the palatalisation of "k", "g", and "sk" had been completed, such a change is quite a recent development, as well as change "Cve" > "Cvø".
The Faroese alphabet consists of 29 letters derived from the Latin script:
As with most other Germanic languages, Faroese has a large number of vowels, with 26 in total. Vowel distribution is similar to other North Germanic languages in that short vowels appear in closed syllables (those ending in consonant clusters or long consonants) and long vowels appearing in open syllables.
Faroese shares with Icelandic and Danish the feature of maintaining a contrast between stops based exclusively on aspiration, not voicing. Geminated stops may be pre-aspirated in intervocalic and word-final position. Intervocalically the aspirated consonants become pre-aspirated unless followed by a closed vowel. In clusters, the preaspiration merges with a preceding nasal or apical approximant, rendering them voiceless.
There are several phonological processes involved in Faroese, including:
Faroese grammar is related and very similar to that of modern Icelandic and Old Norse. Faroese is an inflected language with three grammatical genders and four cases: nominative, accusative, dative and genitive.

</doc>
<doc id="11274" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11274" title="Elementary particle">
Elementary particle

In particle physics, an elementary particle or fundamental particle is a with no substructure, i.e. it is not composed of other particles. Particles currently thought to be elementary include the fundamental fermions (quarks, leptons, antiquarks, and antileptons), which generally are "matter particles" and "antimatter particles", as well as the fundamental bosons (gauge bosons and the Higgs boson), which generally are "force particles" that mediate interactions among fermions. A particle containing two or more elementary particles is called a "composite particle".
Ordinary matter is composed of atoms, once presumed to be elementary particles—"atom" meaning "unable to cut" in Greek—although the atom's existence remained controversial until about 1910, as some leading physicists regarded molecules as mathematical illusions, and matter as ultimately composed of energy. Subatomic constituents of the atom were first identified in the early 1930s; the electron and the proton, along with the photon, the particle of electromagnetic radiation. At that time, the recent advent of quantum mechanics was radically altering the conception of particles, as a single particle could seemingly span a field as would a wave, a paradox still eluding satisfactory explanation.
Via quantum theory, protons and neutrons were found to contain quarks – up quarks and down quarks – now considered elementary particles. And within a molecule, the electron's three degrees of freedom (charge, spin, orbital) can separate via the wavefunction into three quasiparticles (holon, spinon, and orbiton). Yet a free electron – one which is "not" orbiting an atomic nucleus and hence lacks orbital motion – appears unsplittable and remains regarded as an elementary particle.
Around 1980, an elementary particle's status as indeed elementary – an "ultimate constituent" of substance – was mostly discarded for a more practical outlook, embodied in particle physics' Standard Model, what's known as science's most experimentally successful theory. Many elaborations upon and theories beyond the Standard Model, including the popular supersymmetry, double the number of elementary particles by hypothesizing that each known particle associates with a "shadow" partner far more massive, although all such superpartners remain undiscovered. Meanwhile, an elementary boson mediating gravitation – the graviton – remains hypothetical. Also, as hypotheses indicate, spacetime is probably quantized, so there most likely exist "atoms" of space and time itself.
All elementary particles are either bosons or fermions. These classes are distinguished by their quantum statistics: fermions obey Fermi–Dirac statistics and bosons obey Bose–Einstein statistics. Their spin is differentiated via the spin–statistics theorem: it is half-integer for fermions, and integer for bosons.
In the Standard Model, elementary particles are represented for predictive utility as point particles. Though extremely successful, the Standard Model is limited to the microcosm by its omission of gravitation and has some parameters arbitrarily added but unexplained.
According to the current models of big bang nucleosynthesis, the primordial composition of visible matter of the universe should be about 75% hydrogen and 25% helium-4 (in mass). Neutrons are made up of one up and two down quarks, while protons are made of two up and one down quark. Since the other common elementary particles (such as electrons, neutrinos, or weak bosons) are so light or so rare when compared to atomic nuclei, we can neglect their mass contribution to the observable universe's total mass. Therefore, one can conclude that most of the visible mass of the universe consists of protons and neutrons, which, like all baryons, in turn consist of up quarks and down quarks.
Some estimates imply that there are roughly baryons (almost entirely protons and neutrons) in the observable universe.
The number of protons in the observable universe is called the Eddington number.
In terms of number of particles, some estimates imply that nearly all the matter, excluding dark matter, occurs in neutrinos, which constitute the majority of the roughly elementary particles of matter that exist in the visible universe. Other estimates imply that roughly elementary particles exist in the visible universe (not including dark matter), mostly photons and other massless force carriers.
The Standard Model of particle physics contains 12 flavors of elementary fermions, plus their corresponding antiparticles, as well as elementary bosons that mediate the forces and the Higgs boson, which was reported on July 4, 2012, as having been likely detected by the two main experiments at the Large Hadron Collider (ATLAS and CMS). However, the Standard Model is widely considered to be a provisional theory rather than a truly fundamental one, since it is not known if it is compatible with Einstein's general relativity. There may be hypothetical elementary particles not described by the Standard Model, such as the graviton, the particle that would carry the gravitational force, and sparticles, supersymmetric partners of the ordinary particles.
The 12 fundamental fermions are divided into 3 generations of 4 particles each. Half of the fermions are leptons, three of which have an electric charge of −1, called the electron (), the muon (), and the tau (); the other three leptons are neutrinos (, , ), which are the only elementary fermions with neither electric nor color charge. The remaining six particles are quarks (discussed below).
The following table lists current measured masses and mass estimates for all the fermions, using the same scale of measure: millions of electron-volts relative to square of light speed (MeV/c). For example, the most accurately known quark mass is of the top quark () at 172.7 GeV/c or 172 700 MeV/c, estimated using the On-shell scheme.
Estimates of the values of quark masses depend on the version of quantum chromodynamics used to describe quark interactions. Quarks are always confined in an envelope of gluons which confer vastly greater mass to the mesons and baryons where quarks occur, so values for quark masses cannot be measured directly. Since their masses are so small compared to the effective mass of the surrounding gluons, slight differences in the calculation make large differences in the masses.
There are also 12 fundamental fermionic antiparticles that correspond to these 12 particles. For example, the antielectron (positron) "" is the electron's antiparticle and has an electric charge of +1.
Isolated quarks and antiquarks have never been detected, a fact explained by confinement. Every quark carries one of three color charges of the strong interaction; antiquarks similarly carry anticolor. Color-charged particles interact via gluon exchange in the same way that charged particles interact via photon exchange. However, gluons are themselves color-charged, resulting in an amplification of the strong force as color-charged particles are separated. Unlike the electromagnetic force, which diminishes as charged particles separate, color-charged particles feel increasing force.
However, color-charged particles may combine to form color neutral composite particles called hadrons. A quark may pair up with an antiquark: the quark has a color and the antiquark has the corresponding anticolor. The color and anticolor cancel out, forming a color neutral meson. Alternatively, three quarks can exist together, one quark being "red", another "blue", another "green". These three colored quarks together form a color-neutral baryon. Symmetrically, three antiquarks with the colors "antired", "antiblue" and "antigreen" can form a color-neutral antibaryon.
Quarks also carry fractional electric charges, but, since they are confined within hadrons whose charges are all integral, fractional charges have never been isolated. Note that quarks have electric charges of either + or −, whereas antiquarks have corresponding electric charges of either − or +.
Evidence for the existence of quarks comes from deep inelastic scattering: firing electrons at nuclei to determine the distribution of charge within nucleons (which are baryons). If the charge is uniform, the electric field around the proton should be uniform and the electron should scatter elastically. Low-energy electrons do scatter in this way, but, above a particular energy, the protons deflect some electrons through large angles. The recoiling electron has much less energy and a jet of particles is emitted. This inelastic scattering suggests that the charge in the proton is not uniform but split among smaller charged particles: quarks.
In the Standard Model, vector (spin-1) bosons (gluons, photons, and the W and Z bosons) mediate forces, whereas the Higgs boson (spin-0) is responsible for the intrinsic mass of particles. Bosons differ from fermions in the fact that multiple bosons can occupy the same quantum state (Pauli exclusion principle). Also, bosons can be either elementary, like photons, or a combination, like mesons. The spin of bosons are integers instead of half integers.
Gluons mediate the strong interaction, which join quarks and thereby form hadrons, which are either baryons (three quarks) or mesons (one quark and one antiquark). Protons and neutrons are baryons, joined by gluons to form the atomic nucleus. Like quarks, gluons exhibit color and anticolor – unrelated to the concept of visual color and rather the particles' strong interactions – sometimes in combinations, altogether eight variations of gluons.
There are three weak gauge bosons: W, W, and Z; these mediate the weak interaction. The W bosons are known for their mediation in nuclear decay: The W converts a neutron into a proton then decays into an electron and electron-antineutrino pair.
The Z does not convert particle flavor or charges, but rather changes momentum; it is the only mechanism for elastically scattering neutrinos. The weak gauge bosons were discovered due to momentum change in electrons from neutrino-Z exchange. The massless photon mediates the electromagnetic interaction. These four gauge bosons form the electroweak interaction among elementary particles.
Although the weak and electromagnetic forces appear quite different to us at everyday energies, the two forces are theorized to unify as a single electroweak force at high energies. This prediction was clearly confirmed by measurements of cross-sections for high-energy electron-proton scattering at the HERA collider at DESY. The differences at low energies is a consequence of the high masses of the W and Z bosons, which in turn are a consequence of the Higgs mechanism. Through the process of spontaneous symmetry breaking, the Higgs selects a special direction in electroweak space that causes three electroweak particles to become very heavy (the weak bosons) and one to remain with an undefined rest mass as it is always in motion (the photon). On 4 July 2012, after many years of experimentally searching for evidence of its existence, the Higgs boson was announced to have been observed at CERN's Large Hadron Collider. Peter Higgs who first posited the existence of the Higgs boson was present at the announcement. The Higgs boson is believed to have a mass of approximately 125 GeV. The statistical significance of this discovery was reported as 5 sigma, which implies a certainty of roughly 99.99994%. In particle physics, this is the level of significance required to officially label experimental observations as a discovery. Research into the properties of the newly discovered particle continues.
The graviton is a hypothetical elementary spin-2 particle proposed to mediate gravitation. While it remains undiscovered due to the difficulty inherent in its detection, it is sometimes included in tables of elementary particles. The conventional graviton is massless, although there exist models containing massive Kaluza–Klein gravitons.
Although experimental evidence overwhelmingly confirms the predictions derived from the Standard Model, some of its parameters were added arbitrarily, not determined by a particular explanation, which remain mysterious, for instance the hierarchy problem. Theories beyond the Standard Model attempt to resolve these shortcomings.
One extension of the Standard Model attempts to combine the electroweak interaction with the strong interaction into a single 'grand unified theory' (GUT). Such a force would be spontaneously broken into the three forces by a Higgs-like mechanism. This breakdown is theorized to occur at high energies, making it difficult to observe unification in a laboratory. The most dramatic prediction of grand unification is the existence of X and Y bosons, which cause proton decay. However, the non-observation of proton decay at the Super-Kamiokande neutrino observatory rules out the simplest GUTs, including SU(5) and SO(10).
Supersymmetry extends the Standard Model by adding another class of symmetries to the Lagrangian. These symmetries exchange fermionic particles with bosonic ones. Such a symmetry predicts the existence of supersymmetric particles, abbreviated as "sparticles", which include the sleptons, squarks, neutralinos, and charginos. Each particle in the Standard Model would have a superpartner whose spin differs by from the ordinary particle. Due to the breaking of supersymmetry, the sparticles are much heavier than their ordinary counterparts; they are so heavy that existing particle colliders would not be powerful enough to produce them. However, some physicists believe that sparticles will be detected by the Large Hadron Collider at CERN.
String theory is a model of physics where all "particles" that make up matter are composed of strings (measuring at the Planck length) that exist in an 11-dimensional (according to M-theory, the leading version) or 12-dimensional (according to F-theory) universe. These strings vibrate at different frequencies that determine mass, electric charge, color charge, and spin. A "string" can be open (a line) or closed in a loop (a one-dimensional sphere, like a circle). As a string moves through space it sweeps out something called a "world sheet". String theory predicts 1- to 10-branes (a 1-brane being a string and a 10-brane being a 10-dimensional object) that prevent tears in the "fabric" of space using the uncertainty principle (e.g., the electron orbiting a hydrogen atom has the probability, albeit small, that it could be anywhere else in the universe at any given moment).
String theory proposes that our universe is merely a 4-brane, inside which exist the 3 space dimensions and the 1 time dimension that we observe. The remaining 7 theoretical dimensions either are very tiny and curled up (and too small to be macroscopically accessible) or simply do not/cannot exist in our universe (because they exist in a grander scheme called the "multiverse" outside our known universe).
Some predictions of the string theory include existence of extremely massive counterparts of ordinary particles due to vibrational excitations of the fundamental string and existence of a massless spin-2 particle behaving like the graviton.
Technicolor theories try to modify the Standard Model in a minimal way by introducing a new QCD-like interaction. This means one adds a new theory of so-called Techniquarks, interacting via so called Technigluons. The main idea is that the Higgs-Boson is not an elementary particle but a bound state of these objects.
According to preon theory there are one or more orders of particles more fundamental than those (or most of those) found in the Standard Model. The most fundamental of these are normally called preons, which is derived from "pre-quarks". In essence, preon theory tries to do for the Standard Model what the Standard Model did for the particle zoo that came before it. Most models assume that almost everything in the Standard Model can be explained in terms of three to half a dozen more fundamental particles and the rules that govern their interactions. Interest in preons has waned since the simplest models were experimentally ruled out in the 1980s.
Accelerons are the hypothetical subatomic particles that integrally link the newfound mass of the neutrino to the dark energy conjectured to be accelerating the expansion of the universe.
In this theory, neutrinos are influenced by a new force resulting from their interactions with accelerons, leading to dark energy. Dark energy results as the universe tries to pull neutrinos apart. Accelerons are thought to interact with matter more infrequently than they do with neutrinos.
The most important address about the current experimental and theoretical knowledge about elementary particle physics is the Particle Data Group, where different international institutions collect all experimental data and give short reviews over the contemporary theoretical understanding.
other pages are:

</doc>
<doc id="11278" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11278" title="Miami Marlins">
Miami Marlins

The Miami Marlins are an American professional baseball team based in Miami, Florida. The Marlins compete in Major League Baseball (MLB) as a member club of the National League (NL) East division. Their home park is Marlins Park.
The franchise began play as an expansion team in the 1993 season as the Florida Marlins. The Marlins originally played home games at Joe Robbie Stadium, which they shared with the Miami Dolphins of the National Football League (NFL). In 2012, the team moved to Marlins Park, their first exclusive home and the first to be designed as a baseball park. As part of an agreement with park owner Miami-Dade County to use the stadium, the franchise also changed their name to the Miami Marlins prior to the 2012 season.
The Marlins have qualified for the postseason only three times, but won the World Series during their first two postseason runs in 1997 and 2003. As a result, with their third run ongoing, they are the only franchise in the four major North American professional sports to have never lost a playoff series. Their three playoff appearances came as wild card teams, making them one of two MLB franchises (along with the Colorado Rockies) to have never won a division title. The Marlins are also the first team to win the World Series as a wild card and the second-youngest expansion team to win the championship, claiming their first during their fifth year of existence.
Wayne Huizenga, CEO of Blockbuster Entertainment Corporation, was awarded an expansion franchise in the National League (NL) for a $95 million expansion fee and the team began operations in 1993 as the Florida Marlins. In 2012, the team moved from the football-oriented Sun Life Stadium to Marlins Park in downtown Miami. As a condition of the move, the team was renamed the Miami Marlins, and adopted a new logo and colors.
The Marlins won the World Series in 1997 and 2003, but both titles were followed by controversial periods where the team sold off all the high-priced players and rebuilt. Between 2003 and 2019, the team's two World Series runs also marked their sole postseason appearances. Their three playoff qualifications and seven winning seasons are the fewest among MLB franchises.
The Marlins are the only team to win a World Series in their first two winning seasons (1997 and 2003); in fact, they are the only team to even make the playoffs in their first two winning seasons. In those two seasons, they managed to make a surprise run to the World Series, both times as heavy underdogs. They are also the only team to never lose a postseason series.
From 1993 until 2011, the Marlins had retired the number 5 in honor of Carl Barger, the first president of the Florida Marlins, who had died prior to the team's inaugural season. Barger's favorite player was Joe DiMaggio, thus the selection of number 5. With the move to the new ballpark, the team opted to honor Barger with a plaque instead, and opened number 5 to circulation. Logan Morrison, a Kansas City native and fan of Royals Hall-of-Famer George Brett (who wore that number with the Royals), became the first Marlins player to wear the number.
After José Fernández's death as a result of a boating accident on September 25, 2016, the Miami Marlins announced plans to build a memorial at Marlins Park in his honor. However, Fernández's number 16 has yet to be officially retired.
The Miami Marlins farm system consists of seven minor league affiliates.
The Marlins' flagship radio station from their inception in 1993 through 2007 was WQAM 560 AM. Although the Marlins had plans to leave WQAM after 2006, they remained with WQAM for the 2007 season. On October 11, 2007, the Marlins announced an agreement with WAXY 790 AM to broadcast all games for the 2008 season. Longtime Montreal Expo and current Marlins play-by-play radio announcer Dave Van Horne won the Hall of Fame's Ford C. Frick Award for excellence in baseball broadcasting in 2010. He shares the play-by-play duties with Glenn Geffner.
Games are also broadcast in Spanish on Radio Mambi 710 AM. Felo Ramírez, who calls play-by-play on that station along with Luis Quintana, won the Ford C. Frick Award from the National Baseball Hall of Fame in 2005.
Marlins games are televised by Fox Sports Florida. The last "free TV" broadcast of a game was on WPXM-TV in 2005.
In 1989, "Back to the Future Part II" had a reference to the Chicago Cubs defeating a baseball team from Miami in the 2015 World Series, ending the longest championship drought in all four of the major North American professional sports leagues. In actuality, the Cubs would end up getting swept in four games by the New York Mets in the NLCS, the Marlins failed to make the postseason, and the 2015 World Series was between the Kansas City Royals and the New York Mets, with the Royals winning in five games. Also, both the Cubs and Marlins are part of the National League, rendering a World Series matchup between the two teams impossible.
The Marlins were the first team in Major League Baseball to have a dance/cheer team. Debuting in 2003, the "Marlins Mermaids" influenced other MLB teams to develop their own cheer/dance squads; this was inspired in part by similar squads from the NFL and NBA. In 2008, the Florida Marlins debuted "The Marlins Manatees", Major League Baseball's first all-male dance/energy squad, to star alongside the Mermaids. As of 2012, the Marlins have abandoned the "Mermaids" and "Manatees" for in-game entertainment instead using an "energy squad", a co-ed group of dancers.
In 2019, the Marlins brought back the Mermaids for the first time since 2012.
The following are the five best seasons in Marlins history:
The following are the five worst seasons in Marlins' history:
Other than their first few years as a franchise in the 1990s, the Marlins have consistently ranked as one of lowest attendance teams in the league, coming in last place (30th) several of the past 20 years. Even when Marlins Park was completed for the 2012 season, attendance was only average for the first year, dropping down to second to last by 2013.
Opening Day payrolls for 25-man roster (since 1993):
The annual financial records of the Marlins according to "Forbes" since 2001.

</doc>
<doc id="11281" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11281" title="Frontline (Australian TV series)">
Frontline (Australian TV series)

Frontline is an Australian comedy television series which satirised Australian television current affairs programmes and reporting. It ran for three series of 13 half-hour episodes and was broadcast on ABC TV in 1994, 1995 and 1997.
The series was written, directed and produced by Jane Kennedy, Santo Cilauro, Rob Sitch and Tom Gleisner. They created and performed in the television shows "The D-Generation" and "The Late Show" before creating "Frontline" (as well as "Funky Squad" between series 1 and 2 of "Frontline"). After "Frontline" they moved into feature films, making several popular Australian movies including "The Castle" and "The Dish", and hosted "The Panel" for several years, before moving on to "Thank God You're Here" and later "Have You Been Paying Attention?".
The series was partly inspired by a "60 Minutes" special "Has the media gone too far?". It bears some similarity to the UK series "Drop the Dead Donkey".
The series follows the fortunes of a fictional current affairs show, "Frontline". In the show, "Frontline" competes directly with Nine's "A Current Affair" and Seven's "Real Life", which changed its name to "Today Tonight" from 1995 onwards.
The "Frontline" office showcases and satirises the machinations of the ruthless producers, the self-obsessed airhead host, and the ambitious, cynical reporters, all of whom resort to any sort of underhanded trick to get ratings and maintain their status—including the use of hidden cameras, foot-in-the-door, bullying interview techniques, and chequebook journalism. They ingratiate themselves with the all-powerful network bosses, while the real work is in fact done by their long-suffering production staff.
The station itself also runs other television shows referenced by "Frontline" staff, such as 6 o'clock news program, a 3-hour news review show "Sunday Forum", a sketch show "The Komedy Bunch", a game show "Jackpot", a teen soap opera "Sunshine Cove" which later changed to "Rainbow Island", also lesser mentioned shows such as the football show "Ball-to-Ball", "Late-Night OZ", "Cartoon Crazies", "The Morning Show", "Face the Press" and "Vacation".
The characters and situations were often thinly-disguised parodies of recent real events and real people, giving the show's comedy a black edge. Episodes such as "The Siege" were replays of controversial events which often had occurred just a few months earlier, told as though "Frontline" itself had covered the story.
The dim-witted, egotistical host Mike Moore was a parody of current television hosts and journalists. Sitch has claimed that none of the characters were directly based on a single person, and indeed the character of Moore was a combination of well-known characteristics of a number of high-profile television figures, including "A Current Affair" host Ray Martin, Martin's predecessor Mike Willesee, and "Real Life" host Stan Grant.
The ABC's media review show "Media Watch" was featured prominently. Much of the real life journalistic misconduct reported on "Media Watch" later appeared on "Frontline" in fictionalised form. One example of this was when "Media Watch" reported that Dave "Sluggo" Richardson had made a highly misleading report on Christopher Skase for "Today Tonight". Richardson was suspended from duty for a month, and in the "One Rule for One" episode of "Frontline", fictional reporter Martin di Stasio is suspended for a month for doing exactly the same thing.
Multiple episodes of "Frontline" featured "Media Watch" segments criticising the show.
"Frontline" frequently featured celebrity cameos, unusually including major Australian politicians appearing as themselves, often but not always as interviewees. The most memorable appearance is that of Pauline Hanson in "The Shadow We Cast" (series 3), in which she turns her famous "please explain?" phrase on Mike. Noel Pearson appears as an interviewee later in the same episode. Other appearances include: John Hewson in "The Soufflé Rises" (series 1); Pat Cash in "The Desert Angel"; Cheryl Kernot in "We Ain't Got Dames" (series 1); Ben Elton, Bert Newton, Rosemary Margan, Amanda Keller and Anne Fulwood in "This Night of Nights" (series 1); Glenn Ridge in "Add Sex and Stir" and "Office Mole" (series 2); Glenn Robbins and Molly Meldrum in "Add Sex and Stir"; George Negus in "Add Sex and Stir" and "Dick on the Line" (series 3); and Ian Baker-Finch in "A Hole in the Heart". Harry Shearer appeared in the series 2 episode "Changing the Face of Current Affairs", where he played the character of Larry Hadges. Merv Hughes also starred in the series 2 episode "Workin' Class Man".
Other guest stars appeared in mock-ups of their own shows: Mike Moore appeared on fictitious episodes of "Burke's Backyard" with Don Burke, Rex Hunt's fishing show, and "The AFL Footy Show" with Sam Newman. Stuart Littlemore, who at the time was hosting the media commentary show "Media Watch", appeared in several fictitious episodes as a critic of "Frontline".
"Frontline" broke new ground for Australian situation comedy, by adopting some innovative production strategies. Its rapid production schedule was inspired by UK series "Drop the Dead Donkey", where each episode was written and taped in a single week and scripts were closely based on the real news stories of the preceding seven days.
The "Frontline" scripts were likewise written and the series filmed with a short period, often within a single week. It was a fully collaborative effort, with Cilauro, Kennedy, Gleisner and Sitch all sharing writing and directing duties, and the cast all contributing ideas during all stages of production. So sometimes when the show appeared on then-current events, it was a coincidence, as episodes were delayed by several months. In other cases there was direct commentary on real events, albeit not extremely recent ones.
To create a heightened illusion of grainy documentary realism, footage was shot under fluorescent lights in an actual office building set, and taped on hand-held Hi-8 camcorders usually operated by Gleisner and Cilauro. The footage was then transferred onto film and finally transferred back to videotape (see: Kinescope). Footage that was portrayed as being part of the "Frontline" broadcast (i.e. studio or field reports) was shot at broadcast quality, to increase the "realism" of the satire and complement the behind-the-scenes footage.
In 1997, Channel Seven bought the rights to the series; however, they only aired a handful of episodes. The show was perceived by management as "too close to the bone" for a network significantly focused upon its prime-time current affairs ratings battle with rival stations. The Comedy Channel has shown the series as late as 2005.
In America, "Frontline" was shown as either "Behind the Frontline" on cable or as "Breaking News" on PBS (which already has a news series entitled "Frontline").
In the UK, series 1 and 2 were shown by the Paramount Comedy Channel. Series 3, however, was never screened.
In Canada, it was aired as "Behind the Frontline" on Showcase in 1997.
The series was extremely popular through its run, winning a Logie Award for Most Outstanding Achievement in Comedy in 1995, and a Logie for Alison Whyte as most outstanding actress in 1997. A "Sydney Morning Herald" industry poll rated it No. 2 in the 25 all-time greatest Australian TV shows.
Six episodes from series one were a core text in the Year 12 English Advanced syllabus for the Higher School Certificate in New South Wales (2000–2008) for Module C: Representation and Text: Elective 1: Telling the Truth. The episodes are "Playing the Ego Card", "Add Sex and Stir", "The Siege", "Smaller Fish to Fry", "We Ain't Got Dames", and "This Night of Nights". The show has also been used as a text response for both Years 11 and 12 in the English units of the Victorian Certificate of Education. Episodes of "Frontline" have been analysed for the Media topic in the Year 10 English syllabus in New South Wales since at least 2001 and in Western Australia since at least 2009.
Sitch reprised the role of Mike Moore and "Frontline" during a short sketch on the "Friday Night Crack Up" in October 2014 as part of the ABC's "MentalAs" campaign to raise money and awareness for mental health issues.

</doc>
<doc id="11282" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11282" title="Frédéric Bastiat">
Frédéric Bastiat

Claude-Frédéric Bastiat (; ; 30 June 1801 – 24 December 1850) was a French economist, writer and a prominent member of the French Liberal School.
A Freemason and a member of the French National Assembly, Bastiat developed the economic concept of opportunity cost and introduced the parable of the broken window.
As an advocate of classical economics and the economics of Adam Smith, his views favored a free market and influenced the Austrian School.
Bastiat was born on 29 June 1801 in Bayonne, Aquitaine, a port town in the south of France on the Bay of Biscay. His father, Pierre Bastiat, was a prominent businessman in the town. His mother died in 1808 when Frédéric was seven years old. His father moved inland to the town of Mugron, with Frédéric following soon afterward. The Bastiat estate in Mugron had been acquired during the French Revolution and had previously belonged to the Marquis of Poyanne. Pierre Bastiat died in 1810, leaving Frédéric an orphan. He was fostered by his paternal grandfather and his maiden aunt Justine Bastiat. He attended a school in Bayonne, but his aunt thought poorly of it and so enrolled him in the school Saint-Sever. At age 17, he left school at Sorèze to work for his uncle in his family's export business. It was the same firm where his father had been a partner.
Bastiat began to develop an intellectual interest as he no longer wished to work with his uncle and desired to go to Paris for formal studies. This hope never came true as his grandfather was in poor health and wished to go to the Mugron estate. Bastiat accompanied him and cared for him. The next year when Bastiat was 24, his grandfather died, leaving him the family estate, thereby providing him with the means to further his theoretical inquiries. Bastiat developed intellectual interests in several areas including philosophy, history, politics, religion, travel, poetry, political economy and biography. After the middle-class Revolution of 1830, Bastiat became politically active and was elected justice of the peace of Mugron in 1831 and to the Council General (county-level assembly) of Landes in 1832. Bastiat was elected to the national legislative assembly after the French Revolution of 1848.
His public career as an economist began only in 1844, when his first article was published in the "Journal des économistes" during October of that year and it was ended by his untimely death in 1850. Bastiat contracted tuberculosis, probably during his tours throughout France to promote his ideas and that illness eventually prevented him from making further speeches (particularly at the legislative assembly to which he was elected in 1848 and 1849) and ended his life. In "The Law", he wrote: "Until the day of my death, I shall proclaim this principle with all the force of my lungs (which alas! is all too inadequate)".
This last line is understood by translators to be a reference to the effects of his tuberculosis. During the autumn of 1850, he was sent to Italy by his doctors and he first traveled to Pisa, then to Rome. On 24 December 1850, Bastiat called those with him to approach his bed and murmured twice the words "the truth" before he died at the age of 49.
Bastiat was the author of many works on economics and political economy, generally characterized by their clear organization, forceful argumentation and acerbic wit. Economist Murray Rothbard wrote that "Bastiat was indeed a lucid and superb writer, whose brilliant and witty essays and fables to this day are remarkable and devastating demolitions of protectionism and of all forms of government subsidy and control. He was a truly scintillating advocate of an unrestricted free market". However, Bastiat himself declared that subsidy should be available, albeit limited under extraordinary circumstances, saying the following: "Under extraordinary circumstances, for urgent cases, the State should set aside some resources to assist certain unfortunate people, to help them adjust to changing conditions".
Among his better known works is "Economic Sophisms", a series of essays (originally published in the "Journal des économistes") which contain a defence of free trade and many strongly worded attacks on statist policies. Bastiat wrote the work while living in England to advise the shapers of the French Republic on perils to avoid. "Economic Sophisms" was translated and adapted for an American readership in 1867 by the economist and historian of money Alexander del Mar, writing under the pseudonym Emile Walter.
Contained within "Economic Sophisms" is the satirical parable known as the candlemakers' petition in which candlemakers and tallow producers lobby the Chamber of Deputies of the French July Monarchy (1830–1848) to block out the Sun to prevent its unfair competition with their products. Also included in the "Sophisms" is a facetious petition to the king asking for a law forbidding the usage of everyone's right hand, based on a presumption by some of his contemporaries that more difficulty means more work and more work means more wealth.
Bastiat's most famous work is "The Law", originally published as a pamphlet in 1850. It defines a just system of laws and then demonstrates how such law facilitates a free society. In "The Law", Bastiat wrote that everyone has a right to protect "his person, his liberty, and his property". The state should be only a "substitution of a common force for individual forces" to defend this right. According to Bastiat, justice (meaning defense of one's life, liberty and property) has precise limits, but if government power extends further into philanthropic endeavors, then government becomes so limitless that it can grow endlessly. The resulting statism is "based on this triple hypothesis: the total inertness of mankind, the omnipotence of the law, and the infallibility of the legislator". The public then becomes socially engineered by the legislator and must bend to the legislators' will "like the clay to the potter", saying: Socialism, like the ancient ideas from which it springs, confuses the distinction between government and society. As a result of this, every time we object to a thing being done by government, the socialists conclude that we object to its being done at all. We disapprove of state education. Then the socialists say that we are opposed to any education. We object to a state religion. Then the socialists say that we want no religion at all. We object to a state-enforced equality. Then they say that we are against equality. And so on, and so on. It is as if the socialists were to accuse us of not wanting persons to eat because we do not want the state to raise grain.
I do not dispute their right to invent social combinations, to advertise them, to advocate them, and to try them upon themselves, at their own expense and risk. But I do dispute their right to impose these plans upon us by law – by force – and to compel us to pay for them with our taxes.
Bastiat posits that the law becomes perverted when it punishes one's right to self-defense (of his life, liberty and property) in favor of another's right to legalized plunder which he defines as "if the law takes from some persons what belongs to them, and gives it to other persons to whom it does not belong. See if the law benefits one citizen at the expense of another by doing what the citizen himself cannot do without committing a crime" in which he includes the tax support of "protective tariffs, subsidies, guaranteed profits, guaranteed jobs, relief and welfare schemes, public education, progressive taxation, free credit, and public works". According to Bastiat, legal plunder can be committed in "an infinite number of ways. Thus we have an infinite number of plans for organizing it: tariffs, protection, benefits, subsidies, encouragements, progressive taxation, public schools, guaranteed jobs, guaranteed profits, minimum wages, a right to relief, a right to the tools of labor, free credit, and so on, and so on. All these plans as a whole — with their common aim of legal plunder — constitute socialism". Bastiat also made the following humorous point: "If the natural tendencies of mankind are so bad that it is not safe to permit people to be free, how is it that the tendencies of these organizers are always good? Do not the legislators and their appointed agents also belong to the human race? Or do they believe that they themselves are made of a finer clay than the rest of mankind?"
In his 1850 essay "Ce qu'on voit et ce qu'on ne voit pas" ("What is seen and what is not seen"), Bastiat introduced through the parable of the broken window the concept of opportunity cost in all but name. This term was not coined until over sixty years after his death by Friedrich von Wieser in 1914.
Bastiat also famously engaged in a debate between 1849 and 1850 with Pierre-Joseph Proudhon about the legitimacy of interest. As Robert Leroux argued, Bastiat had the conviction that Proudhon's anti-interest doctrine "was the complete antithesis of any serious approach". Proudhon famously lost his temper and declared to Bastiat: "Your intelligence is asleep, or rather it has never been awake. You are a man for whom logic does not exist. You do not hear anything, you do not understand anything. You are without philosophy, without science, without humanity. Your ability to reason, like your ability to pay attention and make comparisons is zero. Scientifically, Mr. Bastiat, you are a dead man".
Bastiat asserted that the sole purpose of government is to protect the right of an individual to life, liberty and property and why it is dangerous and morally wrong for government to interfere with an individual's other personal matters. From this, Bastiat concluded that the law cannot defend life, liberty and property if it promotes legal or legalized plunder which he defined as using government force and laws to take something from one individual and give it to others (as opposed to a transfer of property via mutually-agreed contracts without using fraud nor violent threats against the other party which Bastiat considered a legitimate transfer of property).
In "The Law", Bastiat explains that if the privileged classes or socialists use the government for legalized plunder, this will encourage the other socioeconomic class to also use legal plunder and that the correct response to the socialists is to cease all legal plunder. Bastiat also explains in "The Law" why his opinion is that the law cannot defend life, liberty and property if it promotes socialist policies. When used to obtain legalized plunder for any group, he says that the law is perverted against the only things (life, liberty and property) it is supposed to defend.
Bastiat was a strong supporter of free trade who was inspired by and routinely corresponded with Richard Cobden and the English Anti-Corn Law League and worked with free-trade associations in France.
Because of his stress on the role of consumer demand in initiating economic progress (a form of demand-side economics), Bastiat has been described by Mark Thornton, Thomas DiLorenzo and other economists as a forerunner of the Austrian School, with Thornton positing that through taking this position on the motivations of human action he demonstrates a pronounced "Austrian flavor". In his "Economic Harmonies", Bastiat states: 
One of Bastiat's most important contributions to economics was his admonition to the effect that good economic decisions can be made only by taking into account the "full picture". That is, economic truths should be arrived at by observing not only the immediate consequences—that is, benefits or liabilities—of an economic decision, but also by examining the long-term second and third consequences. Additionally, one must examine the decision's effect not only on a single group of people (say candlemakers) or a single industry (say candlemaking), but on all people and all industries in the society as a whole. As Bastiat famously put it, an economist must take into account both "What is Seen and What is Not Seen". Bastiat's "rule" was later expounded and developed by Henry Hazlitt in his work "Economics in One Lesson" in which Hazlitt borrowed Bastiat's trenchant broken window fallacy and went on to demonstrate how it applies to a wide variety of economic falsehoods.
A famous section of "Economic Sophisms" concerns the way that tariffs are inherently counterproductive. Bastiat posits a theoretical railway between Spain and France that is built to reduce the costs of trade between the two countries. This is achieved by making goods move to and from the two nations faster and more easily. Bastiat demonstrates that this situation benefits both countries' consumers because it reduces the cost of shipping goods and therefore reduces the price at market for those goods. However, each country's producers begin to criticize their governments because the other country's producers can now provide certain goods to the domestic market at reduced price. Domestic producers of these goods are afraid of being outcompeted by the newly viable industry from the other country, therefore these domestic producers demand that tariffs be enacted to artificially raise the cost of the foreign goods back to their pre-railroad levels so that they can continue to compete. Thus, Bastiat makes two significant statements here:
To further demonstrate his statements, Bastiat suggests—in a classic "reductio ad absurdum"—that rather than enacting tariffs, the government should simply destroy the railroad anywhere that foreign goods can outcompete local goods. Since this would be just about everywhere, he goes on to suggest that this government should simply build a broken or "negative" railroad right from the start and not waste time with tariffs and rail building.
Bastiat died in Rome and is buried at San Luigi dei Francesi in the center of that city. He declared on his deathbed that his friend Gustave de Molinari (publisher of Bastiat's 1850 book "The Law") was his spiritual heir.

</doc>
<doc id="11283" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11283" title="Falsifiability">
Falsifiability

In the philosophy of science, falsifiability or refutability is the capacity for a statement, theory or hypothesis to be contradicted by evidence. For example, the statement "All swans are white" is falsifiable because one can observe that black swans exist.
Falsifiability was introduced by the philosopher of science Karl Popper in his book "Logik der Forschung" (1934, revised and translated into English in 1959 as "The Logic of Scientific Discovery"). He proposed it as the cornerstone of a solution to both the problem of induction and the problem of demarcation.
Popper argued for falsifiability and opposed this to the intuitively similar concept of verifiability. Whereas verifying the claim "All swans are white" would require assessment of all swans, which is not possible, the single observation of a black swan is sufficient to falsify it.
As a key notion in the separation of science from non-science, falsifiability has featured prominently in many scientific controversies and applications, even being used as legal precedent.
One of the questions in scientific method is: how does one move from observations to scientific laws? This is the problem of induction. Suppose we want to put the theory that all swans are white to the test. We come across a white swan. We cannot validly argue (or "induce") from "here is a white swan" to "all swans are white"; doing so would require a logical fallacy such as, for example, affirming the consequent.
Popper's idea to solve this problem is that while it is impossible to verify that every swan is white, finding a single black swan shows that "not" every swan is white. We might tentatively accept the proposal that every swan is white, while looking out for examples of non-white swans that would show our conjecture to be false. Falsification uses the valid inference "modus tollens": if from a statement formula_1 (say some law with some initial condition) we logically deduce but what is observed is we infer that formula_1 is false. For example, given the statement "all swans are white" and the initial condition "there is a swan here", we can deduce "the swan here is white", but if what is observed is "the swan here is not white" (say black), then "all swans are white" is false, or it was not a swan.
Popper's response to the problem of induction is simply that induction is actually never used in science. Instead, laws are conjectured, tested and the results are considered together with other aspects to decide which of these laws are applied in practice. In contrast, the logical empiricism movement, which included such philosophers as Moritz Schlick, Rudolf Carnap, Otto Neurath and A.J. Ayer wanted to formalize the idea that, for a law to be scientific, it must be possible to argue on the basis of observations either in favor of its truth or its falsity. There was no consensus among these philosophers about how to achieve that, but the thought expressed by Mach's dictum that "where neither confirmation nor refutation is possible, science is not concerned" was accepted as a basic precept of critical reflection about science.
Popper said that a demarcation criterion was possible, but we have to use the "logical possibility" of falsifications, which is falsifiability. He cited his encounter with psychoanalysis in the 1910s. It did not matter what observation was presented, psychoanalysis could explain it. Unfortunately, the reason why it could explain everything is that it did not exclude anything also. For Popper, this was a failure, because it meant that it could not make any prediction. From a logical standpoint, if one finds an observation that does not contradict a law, it does not mean that the law is true. A verification has no value in itself. But, if the law makes risky predictions and these are corroborated, Popper says, there is a reason to prefer this law over another law that makes less risky predictions or no predictions at all. In the definition of falsifiability, contradictions with observations are not used for actual falsifications, but for "logical" "falsifications" that show that the law makes risky predictions, which is completely different.
On the basic philosophical side of this issue, Popper said that some philosophers of the Vienna Circle had mixed two different problems, that of meaning and that of demarcation, and had proposed in verificationism a single solution to both: a statement that could not be verified was considered meaningless. In opposition to this view, Popper said that there are meaningful theories that are not scientific, and that, accordingly, a criterion of meaningfulness does not coincide with a criterion of demarcation.
Any approach that relies on actual falsifications faces two challenges. The first challenge corresponds to decisions that must be agreed upon by scientists before an attempt to falsify a theory can be successful. The second challenge is how to use falsifications (successful attempts) and corroborations (rejected attempts) to explain progress in science. Imre Lakatos said that there were two incorrect approaches, which he called dogmatic falsificationism and naive falsificationism. Dogmatic falsificationism ignores both challenges, whereas naive falsificationism addresses the first challenge only. Lakatos contrasted them with sophisticated falsificationism, his own improvement on Popper's solution. Popper's methodology is not (and has never been) based on one of the two incorrect approaches. On the terminological side of this issue, Popper said that he never referred to his methodology as "falsificationism", tended to avoid this term and proposed instead the term "critical rationalism".
A dogmatic falsificationist ignores that every observation is theory impregnated. This leads to the critique that it is unclear which theory is falsified. Is it the one that is being studied or the one behind the observation? This is sometimes called the 'Duhem–Quine problem'. An example is Galileo's refutation of the theory that celestial bodies are faultless crystal balls. Many considered that it was the optical theory of the telescope that was false, not the theory of celestial bodies. Another example is the theory that neutrinos are emitted in beta decays. Had they not been observed in the Cowan–Reines neutrino experiment, many would have considered that the strength of the beta-inverse reaction used to detect the neutrinos was not sufficiently high. At the time, wrote, the possibility that this strength was sufficiently high was a "rather pious hope".
A dogmatic falsificationist ignores the role of auxiliary hypotheses, which could explain the contradicting observation. For the falsification to logically occur, a ceteris paribus clause must say that no auxiliary hypothesis is responsible for the contradicting observation. Again, this leads to the critique that it cannot be told if it is the theory or the ceteris paribus clause that is false. Lakatos gives the example of the path of a planet. If the path contradicts Newton's law, we will not know if it is Newton's law that is false or the assumption that no other body influenced the path. Popper was aware that one can always find another auxiliary hypothesis, though he clearly distinguished falsifiable theories such as Newton theory and non-falsifiable theories on this respect.
Lakatos says that Popper's solution to these criticisms requires that one relaxes the assumption that an observation can show a theory to be false: 
Methodological falsificationism replaces the contradicting observation in a falsification with a "contradicting observation" accepted by convention among scientists, a convention that implies three decisions: the theory underlying the observation is correct, no auxiliary hypotheses explain this observation and the written form of the observation matches with an actual observation. The falsifiers thus depend on decisions made by scientists in view of the currently accepted technology and its associated theory. So, Popper says that "Science does not rest upon solid bedrock". He also says (see section ) that it's not an obstacle to the definition of an empirical basis and of falsifiability.
According to Lakatos, naive falsificationism is the claim that methodological falsifications can by themselves explain how scientific knowledge progresses. Very often one must deal with two or more competing theories which are both corroborated. Considering only falsifications, it is not clear why one theory is chosen above the other, even when one is corroborated more often than the other. In fact, a stronger version of the Quine-Duhem thesis says that it's not always possible to rationally pick one theory over the other using falsifications. Considering only falsifications, it is not clear why often a corroborating experiment is seen as a sign of progress. Popper's critical rationalism uses both falsifications and corroborations to explain progress in science. How corroborations and falsifications can explain progress in science was a subject of disagreement between many philosophers, especially between Lakatos and Popper.
Popper distinguished between the creative and informal process from which theories and accepted basic statements emerge and the logical and formal process where theories are falsified or corroborated. The main issue is whether the decision to select a theory among competing theories in the light of falsifications and corroborations should be moved in the logical part as some kind of formal logic. It is a delicate question, because this logic would be inductive: it selects a universal law in view of instances. The answer of Lakatos and many others to that question is that it should. In contradistinction, for Popper, the creative and informal part is guided by methodological rules, which naturally say to favor theories that are corroborated, but this methodology can hardly be made rigorous. Popper does not discuss corroborations when he describes the purely logical part.
Popper's way to analyze progress in science was through the concept of verisimilitude, a way to define how close a theory is to the truth, which he did not consider very significant, except (as an attempt) to describe a concept already clear in practice. Later, it was shown that the specific definition proposed by Popper cannot distinguish between two theories that are false, which is the case for all theories in the history of science. Today, there is still on going research on the general concept of verisimilitude.
Popper distinguished between the logic of science and its applied "methodology". The logical part consists of theories, statements and their purely logical relationship. The methodological part consists, in Popper's view, of informal rules, which are used to guess theories, accept observation statements as factual, etc. When this distinction is applied to the term "falsifiability", it corresponds to a distinction between two completely different meanings of the term. The same is true for the term "falsifiable". Popper said that he only uses "falsifiability" or "falsifiable" in reference to the logical side and that, when he refers to the methodological side, he speaks instead of "falsification" and its problems.
Popper said that methodological problems require proposing methodological rules. For example, one such rule is that, if one refuses to go along with falsifications, then one has retired oneself from the game of science. The logical side does not have such methodological problems, in particular with regard to the falsifiability of a theory, because basic statements are not required to be possible. Methodological rules are only needed in the context of actual falsifications.
So observations have two purposes in Popper's view. On the methodological side, observations can be used to show that a law is false, which Popper calls falsification. On the logical side, observations, which are purely logical constructions, do not show a law to be false, but contradict a law to show its falsifiability. Unlike falsifications and "free from the problems of falsification", these contradictions establish the value of the law, which may eventually be corroborated. He wrote that an entire literature exists because this distinction was not understood.
In Popper's view of science, statements of observation can be constructed within a logical structure independently of any factual observations. The set of all purely logical observations that can be created constitutes the empirical basis. Popper calls them the "basic statements" or "test statements". They are the statements that can be used to show the falsifiability of a theory. Popper says that a basic statement does not have to be possible in practice. It is sufficient that the values or properties that appear in the observations are associated with technologies. See the examples in section .
In more than twelve pages of "The Logic of Scientific Discovery" , Popper discusses informally which statements among those that can be constructed in the logical structure are basic statements. A logical structure uses universal classes to define laws. For example, in the law "all swans are white" the concept of swans is a universal class. It corresponds to a set of properties that every swan must have. It is not restricted to the swans that exist, existed or will exist. Informally, a basic statement is simply a statement that concerns only a finite number of specific instances in universal classes. In particular, an existential statement such as "there exists a black swan" is not a basic statement, because it is not specific about the instance. On the other hand, "this swan here is black" is a basic statement. Popper says that it is a singular existential statement or simply a singular statement. So, basic statements are singular (existential) statements.
Thornton says that basic statements are statements that correspond to particular "observation-reports". He then gives Popper's definition of falsifiability:
As in the case of actual falsifiers, decisions must be taken by scientists to accept a logical structure and its associated empirical basis, but these are usually part of a background knowledge that scientists have in common and, often, no discussion is even necessary. The first decision described by Lakatos is implicit in this agreement, but the other decisions are not needed. This agreement, if one can speak of agreement when there is not even a discussion, exists only in principle. This is where the distinction between the logical and methodological sides of science becomes important. When an actual falsifier is proposed, the technology used is considered in details and, as described in section , an actual agreement is needed. This may require using a deeper empirical basis, hidden within the current empirical basis, to make sure that the properties or values used in the falsifier were obtained correctly ( gives some examples).
Despite the fact that the empirical basis can be shaky, more comparable to a swamp than to a solid ground, the definition that is given above is simply the formalization of a natural requirement on scientific theories, without which, Popper says, the whole logical process of science would not be possible.
This article starts by stating that a falsifier must have parts that are separately technologically possible. Yet doesn't discuss multiple parts in a potential falsifier. This requires some explanation. In his analysis of the scientific nature of universal laws, Popper arrived at the conclusion that laws must "allow us to deduce, roughly speaking, more "empirical" singular statements than we can deduce from the initial conditions alone." A singular statement that has one part only can not contradict a universal law. It can only contradict a prediction that is obtained from the law together with another singular statement, the initial condition. A falsifier of a law has always two parts: the initial condition and the singular statement that contradicts the prediction. There was no need to require that falsifiers have two parts in the definition itself. This made the definition more general and allowed the basic statements themselves to be falsifiable.
Criteria that require that a law must be predictive, just as is required by falsifiability, Popper wrote, "have been put forward as criteria of the meaningfulness of sentences (rather than as criteria of demarcation applicable to theoretical systems) again and again after the publication of [his] book, even by critics who pooh-poohed [his] criterion of falsifiability."
In response to Lakatos who suggested that Newton's theory was as hard to show falsifiable as Freud's psychoanalytic theory, Popper gave the example of an apple that moves from the ground up to a branch and then starts to dance from one branch to another. It is clearly impossible, yet a basic statement that is a valid potential falsifier for Newton's theory, because the position of the apple at different times can be measured.
Another example of a basic statement is "The inert mass of this object is ten times larger than its gravitational mass." This is a basic statement because the inert mass and the gravitational mass can both be measured separately, even though it never happens that they are different. It is, as described by Popper, a valid falsifier for Einstein's equivalence principle.
An example of a basic statement in the theory of evolution is "In this industrial area, the relative fitness of the white-bodied peppered moth is high." Here "fitness" means "reproductive success over the next generation". This is an example of a basic statement, because it is possible to separately determine the kind of environment, industrial vs natural, and the relative fitness of the white-bodied form (relative to the black-bodied form) in an area, even though it never happens that the white-bodied form has a high relative fitness in an industrial area. "In industrial areas, the black form of the peppered moth has higher relative fitness (due to a better camouflage)" is a famous example of a falsifiable statement that illustrates the effect of natural selection.
A famous example of a basic statement from J.B.S. Haldane is "[These are] fossil rabbits in the Precambrian era." This is a basic statement because it is possible to find a fossil rabbit and to determine that the date of a fossil is in the Precambrian era, even though it never happens that the date of a rabbit fossil is in the Precambrian era. Despite opinions to the contrary, some times wrongly attributed to Popper, this shows the scientific character of paleontology or the history of the evolution of life on Earth, because it contradicts the hypothesis in paleontology that all mammals existed in a much more recent era. Richard Dawkins adds that any other modern animal, such as a hippo, would suffice.
A simple example of a non-basic statement is "this angel does not have large wings". It is not a basic statement, because though the absence of large wings can be observed, no technology (independent of the presence of wings) exists to identify angels. Even if it is accepted that angels exist, the sentence "All angels have large wings" is not falsifiable.
Another example from Popper of a non-basic statement is "This human action is altruistic." It is not a basic statement, because no accepted technology allows us to determine whether or not an action is motivated by self-interest. Because no basic statement falsifies it, the statement that "All human actions are egotistic, motivated by self-interest" is thus not falsifiable.
Some adherents of young-Earth creationism make an argument (called the Omphalos hypothesis after the Greek word for navel) that the world was created with the appearance of age; e.g., the sudden appearance of a mature chicken capable of laying eggs. This ad hoc hypothesis introduced into young-Earth creationism makes it non-falsifiable because it says that the time of creation (of a species) measured by the accepted technology is illusory and no accepted technology is proposed to measure the claimed "actual" time of creation. Popper says that it's fine to modify a theory by the introduction of an auxiliary hypothesis, but the new theory must at the least remain falsifiable, which is not the case here. One can also present the Omphalos hypothesis as an auxiliary hypothesis that is introduced into the accepted theory. In this view, the new theory remains falsifiable, but its falsifiability does not increase, because no additional observations are predicted. In both views, the ad hoc hypothesis, seen by itself, is not falsifiable because there is no way to measure the claimed "actual" time of creation that is proposed by this hypothesis. This is discussed in details by Dienes in the case of a variation on the Omphalos hypothesis, which, in addition, specifies that God made the creation in this way to test our faith.
 discussed statements such as "All men are mortal". This is not falsifiable, because it does not matter how old a man is, maybe it will die next year. Maxwell said that this statement is nevertheless useful, because it is often corroborated. He coined the term "corroboration without demarcation". Popper's view is that it is indeed useful, but only because it is indirectly corroborated by the corroboration of the falsifiable law "All men die before the age of 150." For Popper, if no such a falsifiable law exists, then the metaphysical law is not useful, because it's not indirectly corroborated.
Maxwell also used the example "All solids have a melting point." This is not falsifiable, because maybe the melting point will be reached at a higher temperature. The law is falsifiable and more useful if we specify an upper bound on melting points or a way to calculate this upper bound. Another example from Maxwell is "All beta decays are accompanied with a neutrino emission from the same nucleus." This is also not falsifiable, because maybe the neutrino can be detected in a different manner. The law is falsifiable and much more useful from a scientific point of view, if the method to detect the neutrino is specified.
Maxwell said that most scientific laws are metaphysical statements of this kind, which, Popper said, need to be made more precise before they can be indirectly corroborated. In his critique of the falsifiability criterion, Maxwell considered the requirement for decisions in the falsification of, both, the emission of neutrinos (see ) and the existence of the melting point.
Another example, from the pepper moth example, is "In all areas, the white vs black trait of the pepper moth affects its fitness." This is also not falsifiable, because maybe the right environmental factor was not yet considered. When it is specified, namely, fitness in polluted industrial areas vs non polluted areas, then the law is falsifiable and it says which environmental factor should be considered to actually see an effect.
In the 5th and 6th editions of On the origin of species, following a suggestion of Alfred Russel Wallace, Darwin used "Survival of the fittest", an expression first coined by Herbert Spencer, as a synonym for "Natural Selection". Popper and others said that, if one uses the most widely accepted definition of "fitness" in modern biology (see subsection ), namely reproductive success itself, the expression "survival of the fittest" is a tautology.
In practice, as illustrated by the peppered moth example of section , the questions asked are of the kind how specific traits affect the survival rate or fitness of a species when confronted by an environmental factor such as industrial pollution. Great Darwinist Ronald Fisher worked out mathematical theorems to help answer this kind of questions. But, for Popper and others, there is no (falsifiable) law of Natural Selection in this, because it only applies to some rare traits. Instead, for Popper, the work of Fisher and others on Natural Selection is part of an important metaphysical research program.
Popper said that not all non-falsifiable statements are useless in science. Mathematical statements are good examples. Like all formal sciences, mathematics is not concerned with the validity of theories based on observations in the empirical world, but rather, mathematics is occupied with the theoretical, abstract study of such topics as quantity, structure, space and change. Methods of the mathematical sciences are, however, applied in constructing and testing scientific models dealing with observable reality. Albert Einstein wrote, "One reason why mathematics enjoys special esteem, above all other sciences, is that its laws are absolutely certain and indisputable, while those of other sciences are to some extent debatable and in constant danger of being overthrown by newly discovered facts."
Theories of history or politics that allegedly predict future events have a logical form that renders them neither falsifiable nor verifiable. They claim that for every historically significant event, there exists an historical or economic law that "determines" the way in which events proceeded. Failure to identify the law does not mean that it does not exist, yet an event that satisfies the law does not prove the general case. Evaluation of such claims is at best difficult. On this basis, Popper "fundamentally criticized historicism in the sense of any preordained prediction of history" and said that neither Marxism nor psychoanalysis was science, although both made such claims.
Popper made a clear distinction between the original theory of Marx and what came to be known as Marxism later on. For Popper, the original theory of Marx contained genuine scientific laws. Though they could not make preordained predictions, these laws constrained how changes can occur in society. One of them was that changes in society cannot "be achieved by the use of legal or political means". For Popper, this was testable, and in fact falsified. "Yet instead of accepting the refutations", Popper wrote, "the followers of Marx re-interpreted both the theory and the evidence in order to make them agree. ... They thus gave a 'conventionalist twist' to the theory; and by this stratagem they destroyed its much advertised claim to scientific status."
Falsifiability has been used in the "McLean v. Arkansas" case (in 1982), the "Daubert" case (in 1993) and other cases. A survey of 303 federal judges conducted in 1998 found that "[P]roblems with the nonfalsifiable nature of an expert's underlying theory and difficulties with an unknown or too-large error rate were cited in less than 2% of cases."
In the ruling of the "McLean v. Arkansas" case, Judge William Overton used falsifiability as one of the criteria to determine that "creation science" was not scientific and should not be taught in Arkansas public schools as such (it can be taught as religion). In his testimony, philosopher Michael Ruse defined the characteristics which constitute science as (see and ):
In his conclusion related to this criterion Judge Overton stated that 
In several cases of the United States Supreme Court, the court described scientific methodology using the five Daubert factors, which include falsifiability. The Daubert result cited Popper and other philosophers of science: 
David H. Kaye said that references to the Daubert majority opinion confused falsifiability and falsification and that "inquiring into the existence of meaningful attempts at falsification is an appropriate and crucial consideration in admissibility determinations."
Section shows that falsifiability is useful to demarcate between scientific and non-scientific theories, but why should falsifiability be the criterion for scientific theories? The first reason that comes to mind is to support a methodological rule that can conclusively falsify these theories. However, as described in , rigorously speaking, it is not possible to falsify a theory. Moreover, as described in , falsification plays no decisive role in the choice of a new theory. Therefore, even if it was possible to rigorously falsify a theory, the usefulness of this methodological rule and indirectly of falsifiability would remain unclear. For Popper, this application of falsifiability or methodological rule suffers from the problems of falsification because it refers to an inadequate view of science, the bucket view of science. For Popper (see below), the correct application of falsifiability, i.e., his methodology, is as free from the problems of falsification as falsifiability itself, because it relies on a different view, the searchlight view of science.
Some tentative explanations for the growth of scientific knowledge are based on what Popper calls the bucket view of science. In this view, observation statements accumulate in a bucket through observations and various procedures are used to make sure that they are valid. Next, new laws are obtained in a way that can be "justified" using inference rules that are allowed to process all the knowledge that is available in the bucket. In this justificational picture, Hume said that we cannot obtain new universal laws (except what can be obtained through deductive rules). Hume's argument is based on reasonable premises: non-deductive rules are in need of justification, circular arguments are not valid, etc. If we accept Hume's premises, even probabilistic attempts to explain the growth of knowledge in terms of the bucket view of science, Popper stated, are doomed to fail.
Popper's solution to this problem is simply to reject the bucket view of science. His main argument is basically that he accepts Hume's argument, which shows that the bucket view fails to explain the growth of objective knowledge. Popper said that the processes in the bucket are better seen as physical processes and the laws that govern these processes are biological. To help people get rid of the limitations associated with the bucket view, Popper brought out the main issue with this view: it ignores the organismic aspect of knowledge. Given that the bucket view is a dead end, it is natural to accept that biological predispositions and expectations play an important role in these processes.
Popper proposed to replace the bucket view of science with what he called the searchlight view of science. In that view, Popper wrote, there is no reason why any methodology should work. It is easy, Popper said, to imagine universes where no methodology can work or even only exist. If you want to believe that the methodology will work, it must be postulated as an axiom. In Popper's case, the axiom is that the methodology of conjectures and refutations is going to work. The conjectures are the searchlight, because they lead to observational results. But this axiom will not help any objective rule in the justification of scientific knowledge. There is no point in attempting any justification in the searchlight view. For a popperian, the absence of these objective rules is expected. It is not a failure. In this line of thought, Einstein wrote that there is no logical path to science.
Popper's scientific methodology that accompanies falsifiability contains rules such as "He who decides one day that scientific statements do not call for any further test, and that they can be regarded as finally verified, retires from the game." In general, the rules of Popper's methodology influence which theories will be chosen or rejected, but these rules do that only through decisions taken by the scientists. As described in , every rule to determine or choose theories must rely on the good judgement of the scientists.
Back to the original question: why should falsifiability be the criterion? It is not that falsification directly leads to the rejection of a theory. That would be a rule of the bucket view of science. It is not that we must always look for theories that are more falsifiable. That would also be a rule of the bucket view of science. Popper's main methodological rule is that scientists must try to guess and corroborate (or equivalently falsify) bold and useful conjectures and take any falsification as a problem that can be used to start a critical discussion. In other words, the usefulness of falsifiability is that falsifiable conjectures say more, because they prohibit more and, in the case of their falsification, they lead to useful problems, which steer the creative process of science. For Popper, who knew most of section , this is exactly what we should expect from a scientific theory.
The original answer provided, which is the possibility to actually falsify a theory as if there was a rule to eliminate laws, missed the whole point: No rule can supersede the hidden organic aspect of knowledge in the processing of the available objective knowledge. If there is any inference rule, the final decision must still be left to the organic aspect or, more simply, to the scientists. For Popper, inference rules are tantamount to a "quest for certainty", which he saw as the main weakness of the bucket view of science.
In , it is seen that Lakatos reached the same conclusion in the following sense that he said that his methodology did not offer any "firm heuristic advice about what to do". Before Popper's time, in 1906, being aware of the problems of falsification, Pierre Duhem reached the same conclusion. Popper reemphasized non-justificationism, which was a good match for his added falsifiability criterion and associated critical methodology.
As described in section , Lakatos and Popper agreed that universal laws cannot be logically deduced (except from laws that say even more), but he felt that, if the explanation for new laws can not be deductive, it must be inductive. He urged Popper explicitly to adopt some inductive principle and sets himself the task to find an inductive methodology. However, the methodology that he found did not offer any exact inductive rules. In a response to Kuhn, Feyerabend and Musgrave, Lakatos acknowledged that the methodology depends on the good judgment of the scientists. Feyerabend wrote in "Against Method" that Lakatos' methodology of scientific research programmes is epistemological anarchism in disguise and Musgrave made a similar comment. In more recent work, Feyerabend says that Lakatos uses rules, but whether or not to follow any of these rules is left to the judgment of the scientists. This is also discussed elsewhere.
Popper also offered a methodology with rules, but these rules are also not inductive rules, because they are not by themselves used to accept laws or establish their validity. They do that through the creativity or "good judgment" of the scientists only. For Popper, the required non deductive component of science never had to be an inductive methodology. He always viewed this component as a creative process beyond the explanatory reach of any rational methodology, but yet used to decide which theories should be studied and applied, find good problems and guess useful conjectures. Quoting Einstein to support his view, Popper said that this renders obsolete the need for an inductive methodology or logical path to the laws. For Popper, no inductive methodology was ever proposed to satisfactorily explain science.
Section says that both Lakatos's and Popper's methodology are not inductive. Yet Lakatos's methodology extended importantly Popper's methodology: it added a historiographical component to it. This allowed Lakatos to find corroborations for his methodology in the history of science. The basic units in his methodology, which can be abandoned or pursued, are research programmes. Research programmes can be degenerative or progressive and only degenerative research programmes must be abandoned at some point. For Lakatos, this is mostly corroborated by facts in history.
In contradistinction, Popper did not propose his methodology as a tool to reconstruct the history of science. Yet, some times, he did refer to history to corroborate his methodology. For example, he remarked that theories that were considered great successes were also the most likely to be falsified. Zahar's view was that, with regard to corroborations found in the history of science, there was only a difference of emphasis between Popper and Lakatos.
As an anecdotal example, in one of his articles Lakatos challenged Popper to show that his theory was falsifiable: he asked "Under what conditions would you give up your demarcation criterion?". Popper replied "I shall give up my theory if Professor Lakatos succeeds in showing that Newton's theory is no more falsifiable by 'observable states of affairs' than is Freud's."
Thomas Kuhn analyzed what he calls periods of normal science as well as revolutions from one period of normal science to another, whereas Popper's view is that only revolutions are relevant. For Popper, the role of science, mathematics and metaphysics, actually the role of any knowledge, is to solve puzzles. In the same line of thought, Kuhn observes that in periods of normal science the scientific theories, which represent some paradigm, are used to routinely solve puzzles and the validity of the paradigm is hardly in question. It's only when important new puzzles emerge that cannot be solved by accepted theories that a revolution might occur. This can be seen as a viewpoint on the distinction made by Popper between the informal and formal process in science (see section ). In the big picture presented by Kuhn, the routinely solved puzzles are corroborations. Falsifications or otherwise unexplained observations are unsolved puzzles. All of these are used in the informal process that generates a new kind of theory. Kuhn says that Popper emphasizes formal or logical falsifications and fails to explain how the social and informal process works.
Popper often uses astrology as an example of a pseudo-science. He says that it is not falsifiable because both the theory itself and its predictions are too imprecise. Kuhn, as an historian of science, remarked that many predictions made by astrologers in the past were quite precise and they were very often falsified. He also said that astrologers themselves acknowledged these falsifications.
Paul Feyerabend rejected any prescriptive methodology at all. He rejected Lakatos' argument for "ad hoc" hypothesis, arguing that science would not have progressed without making use of any and all available methods to support new theories. He rejected any reliance on a scientific method, along with any special authority for science that might derive from such a method. He said that if one is keen to have a universally valid methodological rule, epistemological anarchism or "anything goes" would be the only candidate. For Feyerabend, any special status that science might have, derives from the social and physical value of the results of science rather than its method.
In their book "Fashionable Nonsense" (from 1997, published in the UK as "Intellectual Impostures") the physicists Alan Sokal and Jean Bricmont criticised falsifiability. They include this critique in the "Intermezzo" chapter, where they expose their own views on truth in contrast to the extreme epistemological relativism of postmodernism. Even though Popper is clearly not a relativist, Sokal and Bricmont discuss falsifiability because they see postmodernist epistemological relativism as a reaction to Popper's description of falsifiability, and more generally, to his theory of science.

</doc>
<doc id="11284" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11284" title="Freikorps">
Freikorps

Freikorps (, "Free Corps") were irregular German and other European military volunteer units, or paramilitary, that existed from the 18th to the early 20th centuries. They effectively fought as mercenary or private armies, regardless of their own nationality. In German-speaking countries, the first so-called "Freikorps" ("free regiments", Freie Regimenter) were formed in the 18th century from native volunteers, enemy renegades, and deserters. These sometimes exotically equipped units served as infantry and cavalry (or more rarely as artillery), sometimes in just company strength, sometimes in formations up to several thousand strong. There were also various mixed formations or legions. The Prussian "von Kleist Freikorps" included infantry, jäger, dragoons and hussars. The French "Volontaires de Saxe" combined uhlans and dragoons.
In the aftermath of World War I and during the German Revolution of 1918–19, "Freikorps" consisting largely of World War I veterans were raised as right-wing paramilitary militias. They were ostensibly mustered to fight on behalf of the government against the Soviet-backed German Communists attempting to overthrow the Weimar Republic. But, the "Freikorps" largely despised the Republic and were involved in assassinations of its supporters.
The very first "Freikorps" were recruited by Frederick the Great during the Seven Years' War. On 15 July 1759, Frederick ordered the creation of a squadron of volunteer hussars to be attached to the 1st Regiment of Hussars (von Kleist's Own). He entrusted the creation and command of this new unit to Colonel Friedrich Wilhelm von Kleist. This first squadron (80 men) was raised in Dresden and consisted mainly of Hungarian deserters. This squadron was placed under the command of Lieutenant Johann Michael von Kovacs. At the end of 1759, the first four squadrons of dragoons (also called horse grenadiers) of the "Freikorps" were organised. They initially consisted of Prussian volunteers from Berlin, Magdeburg, Mecklenburg and Leipzig, but later recruited deserters. The "Freikorps" were regarded as unreliable by regular armies, so they were used mainly as sentries and for minor duties.
These early "Freikorps" appeared during the War of the Austrian Succession and especially the Seven Years' War, when France, Prussia, and the Habsburg Monarchy embarked on an escalation of petty warfare while conserving their regular regiments. Even during the last Kabinettskrieg, the War of the Bavarian Succession, "Freikorp" formations were formed in 1778. Germans, Hungarians, Poles, Lithuanians, and South Slavs, as well as Turks, Tatars and Cossacks, were believed by all warring parties to be inherently good fighters. The nationality of many soldiers can no longer be ascertained as the ethnic origin was often described imprecisely in the regimental lists. Slavs (Croats, Serbs) were often referred to as "Hungarians" or just "Croats", and Muslim recruits (Albanians, Bosnians, Tatars) as "Turks".
For Prussia, the Pandurs, who were made up of Croats and Serbs, were a clear model for the organization of such "free" troops. Frederick the Great created 14 "free infantry" ("Frei-Infanterie") units, mainly between 1756 and 1758, which were intended to be attractive to those soldiers who wanted military "adventure", but did not want to have to do military drill. A distinction should be made between the "Freikorps" formed up to 1759 for the final years of the war, which operated independently and disrupted the enemy with surprise attacks, and the free infantry which consisted of various military branches (such as infantry, hussars, dragoons, "jäger") and were used in combination. They were often used to ward off Maria Theresa's Pandurs. In the era of linear tactics, light troops had been seen necessary for outpost, reinforcement and reconnaissance duties. During the war, eight such volunteer corps were set up:
Because, with some exceptions, they were seen as undisciplined and less battleworthy, they were used for less onerous guard and garrison duties. In the so-called "petty wars", the "Freikorps" interdicted enemy supply lines with guerrilla warfare. In the case of capture, their members were at risk of being executed as irregular fighters. In Prussia the "Freikorps", which Frederick the Great had despised as "vermin", were disbanded. Their soldiers were given no entitlement to pensions or invalidity payments.
In France, many corps continued to exist until 1776. They were attached to regular dragoon regiments as "jäger" squadrons. During the Napoleonic Wars, Austria recruited various "Freikorps" of Slavic origin. The Slavonic Wurmser "Freikorps" fought in Alsace. The combat effectiveness of the six Viennese "Freikorps" (37,000 infantrymen and cavalrymen), however, was low. An exception were the border regiments of Croats and Serbs who served permanently on the Austro-Ottoman border.
"Freikorps" in the modern sense emerged in Germany during the course of the Napoleonic Wars. They fought not so much for money but rather out of patriotic motives, seeking to shake off the French Confederation of the Rhine. After the French under Emperor Napoleon had either conquered the German states or forced them to collaborate, remnants of the defeated armies continued to fight on in this fashion. Famous formations included the King's German Legion, who had fought for Britain in French-occupied Spain and mainly were recruited from Hanoverians, the Lützow Free Corps and the Black Brunswickers.
The "Freikorps" attracted many nationally disposed citizens and students. "Freikorps" commanders such as Ferdinand von Schill, Ludwig Adolf Wilhelm von Lützow or Frederick William, Duke of Brunswick-Wolfenbüttel, known as the "Black Duke", led their own attacks on Napoleonic occupation forces in Germany. Those led by Schill were decimated in the Battle of Stralsund (1809); many were killed in battle or executed at Napoleon's command in the aftermath. The "Freikorps" were very popular during the period of the German War of Liberation (1813–15), during which von Lützow, a survivor of Schill's "Freikorps", formed his Lützow Free Corps. The anti-Napoleonic "Freikorps" often operated behind French lines as a kind of commando or guerrilla force.
Throughout the 19th century, these anti-Napoleonic "Freikorps" were greatly praised and glorified by German nationalists, and a heroic myth built up around their exploits. This myth was invoked, in considerably different circumstances, in the aftermath of Germany's defeat in World War I.
Even in the aftermath of the Napoleonic era, "Freikorps" were set up with varying degrees of success.
During the March 1848 riots, student "Freikorps" were set up in Munich.
In First Schleswig War of 1848 the "Freikorps" of "von der Tann", "Zastrow" and others distinguished themselves.
In 1864 in Mexico, the French formed the so-called "Contreguerrillas" under former Prussian hussar officer, Milson. In Italy, Garibaldi formed his famous "Freischars", notably the "Thousand of Marsala", which landed in Sicily in 1860.
Even before the Franco-Prussian War of 1870/71, "Freikorps" were developed in France that were known as franc-tireurs.
The meaning of the word "Freikorps" changed over time. After 1918, the term was used for the paramilitary organizations that sprang up around Germany as soldiers returned in defeat from World War I. They were the key Weimar paramilitary groups active during that time. Many German veterans felt disconnected from civilian life, and joined a "Freikorps" in search of stability within a military structure. Others, angry at their sudden, apparently inexplicable defeat, joined up in an effort to put down communist uprisings, such as the Spartacist uprising, or exact some form of revenge on those they considered responsible for the armistice. They received considerable support from Minister of Defence Gustav Noske, a member of the Social Democratic Party of Germany. Noske used them to crush the German Revolution of 1918–19 and the Marxist Spartacist League, including arresting and executing leaders Karl Liebknecht and Rosa Luxemburg on 15 January 1919. They were used to defeat the Bavarian Soviet Republic in May 1919.
On 5 May 1919, members of "Freikorps" Lützow in Perlach near Munich, acted on a tip from a local cleric and arrested and killed twelve alleged communist workers (most of them actually members of the Social Democratic Party). A memorial on Pfanzeltplatz in Munich today commemorates the incident. In another incident on May 6, 1919, "Freikorps" forces in Munich entered a Catholic Church proceeding to beat and then shoot 25 people who had been falsely accused of being Communists.
"Freikorps" also fought against the communists in the Baltics, Silesia, Poland and East Prussia after the end of World War I, including aviation combat, often with significant success. Anti-Slavic racism was sometimes present, although the ethnic cleansing ideology and anti-Semitism expressed in later years had not yet developed. In the Baltics they fought against communists as well as against the newborn independent democratic countries Estonia and Latvia. In Latvia, Freikorps murdered 300 civilians in Mitau who were suspected of having "Bolshevik sympathies". After the capture of Riga, another 3000 alleged communists were killed, including summary executions of 50–60 prisoners daily. Though officially disbanded in 1920, some of them continued to exist for several years and many "Freikorps" attempted, unsuccessfully, to overthrow the government in the Kapp Putsch in March 1920. Their attack was halted when German citizens loyal to the government went on strike, cutting off many services and making daily life so problematic that the coup was called off.
In 1920, Adolf Hitler had just begun his political career as the leader of the tiny and as-yet-unknown Deutsche Arbeiterpartei/DAP German Workers' Party, which was soon renamed the Nationalsozialistische Deutsche Arbeiterpartei/NSDAP (National Socialist German Workers Party) or Nazi Party in Munich. Numerous future members and leaders of the Nazi Party had served in the "Freikorps", including Ernst Röhm, future head of the Sturmabteilung, or SA, Heinrich Himmler, future head of the Schutzstaffel, or SS, and Rudolf Höß, the future "Kommandant" of the Auschwitz concentration camp. Hermann Ehrhardt, founder and leader of Marinebrigade Ehrhardt, and his deputy Commander Eberhard Kautter, leaders of the Viking League, refused to help Hitler and Erich Ludendorff in their 1923 Beer Hall Putsch and conspired against them.
Hitler eventually viewed some of them as threats. A huge ceremony was arranged on 9 November 1933 in which the "Freikorps" leaders symbolically presented their old battle flags to Hitler's SA and SS. It was a sign of allegiance to their new authority, the Nazi state. When Hitler's internal purge of the party, the Night of the Long Knives, came in 1934, a large number of Freikorps leaders were targeted for killing or arrest, including Ehrhardt and Röhm. Historian Robert GL Waite claims that in Hitler's "Röhm Purge" speech to the "Reichstag" on 13 July 1934, he implied that the Freikorps were one of the groups of "pathological enemies of the state".
In French, the Freikorps are referred to as "Corps Franc". Starting in October 1939, the French Army raised a number of Corps Franc units with the mission of carrying out ambush, raid, and harassing operations forward of the Maginot Line during the period known as the Phoney War (Drôle de Guerre). They were tasked with attacking German troops guarding the Siegfried Line. Future Vichy collaborationist, Anti-Bolshevik and SS Major Joseph Darnand was one of the more famous participants in these commando actions.
In May 1940, the experience of the Phoney War-era Corps Franc was an influence in creating the Groupes Francs Motorisé de Cavalerie (GFC) who played a storied role in the delaying operations and last stands of the Battle of France, notably in the defenses of the Seine and the Loire.
On 25 November 1942, in the immediate aftermath of the Allied Invasion of Vichy French North Africa the Corps Francs d'Afrique (CFA) (African Corps Franc) was raised in French Morocco within the Free French Forces by General Giraud. Giraud drew the members of the all-volunteer unit from Moroccans of diverse religious backgrounds (Christian, Jew, and Muslim) and gave them the title of "Vélite," a name inspired by the elite light infantry of Napoleon's Imperial Guard, who were named after the Roman Velites. Much of the Corps was drawn from Henri d'Astier de la Vigerie and José Aboulker's Géo Gras French Resistance Group which had been responsible for the Algiers Insurrection where the Resistance seized control of Algiers on the night of 8 November 1942 in coordination with the Allied landings happening that same night. In taking over Algiers, they managed to capture both Admiral Darlan and General Juin, which led to the Darlan Deal wherein Vichy French forces came over to the Allied side. Darlan was later assassinated by Fernand Bonnier de La Chapelle, an early member of the Corps Francs d'Afrique. They functioned as the Free French equivalent to the British Commandos. 
The Corps Francs d'Afrique went on to fight Rommel's Afrikakorps in Tunisia with the U.S. 5th Army. They fought alongside the British 139th Brigade at Kassarine and Sidi Nasr, where they famously conducted a heroic bayonet charge, facing two to one odds, against the Italian 34th Battalion of the 10th Bersaglieri near the mountain of Kef Zilia on the road to Bizerte, taking 380 prisoners, killing the Italian battalion commander, and capturing the plans for Operation Auslading. They participated in the capture of Bizerte in May 1943.
For its actions, the Corps Franc d'Afrique was awarded the Croix de Guerre.
The CFA formally was dissolved on 9 July 1943, with its members and equipment forming the corps of the newly created African Commando Group (GCA) on 13 July 1943 in Dupleix, Algeria, today seen as a forebear to the postwar Parachutist Shock Battalions and the modern day 13th RDP. The GCA went on to fight at Pianosa, Elba, Salerno, Provence, Belfort, Giromagny, Alsace, Cernay, Guebwiller, Buhl, and the Invasion of Germany.
Notes
Bibliography

</doc>
<doc id="11285" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11285" title="Francisco I. Madero">
Francisco I. Madero

Francisco Ignacio Madero González (; 30 October 1873 – 22 February 1913) was a Mexican revolutionary, writer and statesman who served as the 33rd president of Mexico from 1911 until shortly before his assassination in 1913. A wealthy landowner, he was nonetheless an advocate for social justice and democracy. Madero was notable for challenging long-time President Porfirio Díaz for the presidency in 1910 and being instrumental in sparking the Mexican Revolution.
Born into an extremely wealthy family in the northern state of Coahuila, Madero was an unusual politician, who until he ran for president in the 1910 elections, had never held office. In his 1908 book entitled "The Presidential Succession in 1910", Madero called on voters to prevent the sixth reelection of Porfirio Díaz, which Madero considered anti-democratic. His vision would lay the foundation for a democratic, twentieth-century Mexico, but without polarizing the social classes. To that effect, he bankrolled the opposition Anti-Reelectionist Party and urged voters to oust Díaz in the 1910 election. Madero's candidacy against Díaz garnered widespread support in Mexico. He was possessed of independent financial means, ideological determination, and the bravery to oppose Díaz when it was dangerous to do so. Díaz had Madero arrested before the elections, which were then seen as fraudulent. Madero escaped from prison and issued the Plan of San Luis Potosí from the United States. For the first time, he called for an armed uprising against the illegitimately elected Díaz, and outlined a program of reform. The armed phase of the Mexican Revolution dates to his plan.
Uprisings in Morelos under Emiliano Zapata and in the north by Pascual Orozco, Pancho Villa and others and the inability of the Federal Army to suppress them forced Díaz's resignation on 25 May 1911, after the signing of the Treaty of Ciudad Juárez; Madero was enormously popular among many sectors, but he did not assume the presidency. An interim president was installed and elections were scheduled for fall 1911. Madero was elected president on 15 October 1911 by almost 90% of the vote. Sworn into office on 6 November 1911, he became one of Mexico's youngest elected presidents, having just turned 38.
Madero's administration soon encountered opposition both from more radical revolutionaries and from conservatives. He did not move quickly on land reform, which was a key demand of many of his supporters. Former supporters Emiliano Zapata declared himself in rebellion against Madero in the Plan of Ayala as Pascual Orozco did in his Plan Orozquista. These were significant challenges to Madero's presidency. Labor also became disillusioned by his moderate policies. Foreign entrepreneurs were concerned that Madero was unable to maintain political stability that would keep their investments safe. Foreign governments were concerned that a destabilized Mexico would threaten the international order.
In February 1913, a military coup took place in the Mexican capital led by General Victoriano Huerta, the military commander of the city, and supported by the United States ambassador. Madero was arrested and a short time later assassinated along with his vice-president, José María Pino Suárez, on 22 February 1913, following the series of events known as the Ten Tragic Days (la "Decena Trágica"). In death, Madero became a unifying force of disparate elements in Mexico opposed to the regime of Huerta. In the north, governor of Coahuila Venustiano Carranza led what became the Constitutionalist Army against Huerta, while Zapata continued in his rebellion under the Plan of Ayala. Once Huerta was ousted in July 1914, the opposition coalition held together by Madero's memory dissolved and Mexico entered a new stage of civil war.
Madero was born in the hacienda of El Rosario, in Parras de la Fuente, Coahuila, the first son of Francisco Ignacio Madero Hernández and Mercedes González Treviño, and the first grandson of family patriarch, Evaristo Madero, governor of Coahuila. He was sickly as a child, and was small in stature as an adult. It is widely believed that Madero's middle initial, I, stood for Indalecio, but according to his birth certificate it stood for Ignacio. Furthermore, on the birth certificate, Ignacio was written with the archaic spelling of Ygnacio.
His family has been described as one of the five wealthiest families in Mexico. His grandfather, Evaristo Madero, began as a founder of a regional carting business, but he took advantage of economic opportunity and transported cotton from the Confederate states to Mexican ports during the U.S. Civil War (1861–65). Having built a diversified fortune, but before his real success, Evaristo first married Rafaela Hernández Lombraña, half-sister of the powerful miner and banker Antonio V. Hernández. Alongside his brother-in-law, and other of his new political family's relations, he founded the "Compañía Industrial de Parras", initially involved in commercial vineyards, cotton, and textiles, and later also in mining, cotton mills, ranching, banking, coal, guayule rubber, and foundries in the later part of the nineteenth century. For many years, the family prospered during Porfirio Díaz's regime, and by 1910 the family was one of the richest in Mexico, worth 30 million pesos ($15 million U.S. dollars of the day, and almost $500 million U.S. dollars in today's money). Much of this wealth arose from the diversification of Madero lands during the 1890s into the production of "guayule" rubber plants.
After the death of his first wife, and having built his success, Evaristo Madero remarried to Doña Manuela de Farías Benavides, member of one of northern Mexico's most aristocratic families, daughter of Don Juan Francisco de Farías, mayor of Laredo. Evaristo Madero also served as governor of Coahuila from 1880 to 1884, during the four-year interregnum of Porfirio Díaz's rule. Afterwards, Evaristo was permanently sidelined from political office when Díaz returned to the presidency in 1884 and served until 1911. Evaristo Madero's two marriages were fruitful, with a total of 18 children, 14 of whom would survive until adulthood, and whose descendants make up some of Mexico's most influential families until this day. Thus, young Francisco was a member of a huge and powerful northern Mexican clan with a focus on commercial rather than political interests.
Francisco and his brother Gustavo A. Madero attended the Jesuit college in Saltillo, but his early Catholic education had little lasting impact. As a young man, his father sent him to carry out preparatory studies at the Culver Academies in the United States and later at the Lycée Hoche in Versailles, France, where he completed the classe préparatoire aux grandes écoles program. Soon after, he was admitted to study business at the prestigious École des Hautes Études Commerciales de Paris (HEC).
His father's subscription to the magazine "Revue Spirite" awakened in the young Madero an interest in Spiritism, an offshoot of Spiritualism. During his time in Paris, Madero made a pilgrimage to the tomb of Allan Kardec, the founder of Spiritism, and became a passionate advocate of the belief, soon coming to believe he was a medium.
Following business school, Madero traveled to the University of California, Berkeley, to study agricultural techniques and to improve his English. During his time there, he was influenced by the theosophist ideas of Annie Besant, which were prominent at nearby Stanford University.
In 1893, the 20-year-old Madero returned to Mexico and assumed management of the Madero family's hacienda at San Pedro, Coahuila. Well traveled and well educated, he was now in robust health. Proving an enlightened and progressive member of the Madero commercial complex, Francisco installed new irrigation, introduced American cotton and cotton machinery, and built a soap factory and also an ice factory. He embarked on a lifelong commitment to philanthropy. His employees were well paid and received regular medical exams; he built schools, hospitals, and community kitchens; and he paid to support orphans and award scholarships. He also taught himself homeopathy and offered medical treatments to his employees. Francisco became increasingly engaged with Spiritism and in 1901 was convinced that the spirit of his brother Raúl, who had died at age 4, was communicating with him, urging him to do charity work and practice self-discipline and self-abnegation. Madero became a vegetarian and stopped drinking alcohol and smoking.
Already well-connected to a wealthy family and now well-educated in business, he had built a personal fortune of over 500,000 pesos by 1899. The family was organized on patriarchal principles, so that even though young Francisco was wealthy in his own right, his father and especially his grandfather Evaristo viewed him as someone who should be under the authority of his elders. As the eldest sibling, Francisco exercised authority over his younger brothers and sisters. In January 1903, he married Sara Pérez, first in a civil ceremony, and then a Catholic nuptial mass celebrated by the archbishop.
On 2 April 1903, Bernardo Reyes, governor of Nuevo León, violently crushed a political demonstration, an example of the increasingly authoritarian policies of president Porfirio Díaz. Madero was deeply moved and, believing himself to be receiving advice from the spirit of his late brother Raúl, he decided to act. The spirit of Raúl told him, "Aspire to do good for your fellow citizens...working for a lofty ideal that will raise the moral level of society, that will succeed in liberating it from oppression, slavery, and fanaticism." Madero founded the Benito Juárez Democratic Club and ran for municipal office in 1904, though he lost the election narrowly. In addition to his political activities, Madero continued his interest in Spiritualism, publishing a number of articles under the pseudonym of Arjuna (a prince from the "Mahabharata").
In 1905, Madero became increasingly involved in opposition to the Díaz government. He organized political clubs and founded a political newspaper ("El Demócrata") and a satirical periodical ("El Mosco", "The Fly"). Madero's preferred candidate, Frumencio Fuentes, was defeated by that of Porfirio Díaz in Coahuila's 1905 gubernatorial elections. Díaz considered jailing Madero, but Bernardo Reyes suggested that Francisco's father be asked to control his increasingly political son.
In an interview with journalist James Creelman published on 17 February 1908 issue of "Pearson's Magazine", President Díaz said that Mexico was ready for a democracy and that the 1910 presidential election would be a free election.
Madero spent the bulk of 1908 writing a book, which he believed was at the direction of spirits, now including that of Benito Juárez himself. This book, published in January 1909, was titled "La sucesión presidencial en 1910" ("The Presidential Succession of 1910"). The book quickly became a bestseller in Mexico. The book proclaimed that the concentration of absolute power in the hands of one man – Porfirio Díaz – for so long had made Mexico sick. Madero pointed out the irony that in 1871, Porfirio Díaz's political slogan had been "No Re-election". Madero acknowledged that Porfirio Díaz had brought peace and a measure of economic growth to Mexico. However, Madero argued that this was counterbalanced by the dramatic loss of freedom, including the brutal treatment of the Yaqui people, the repression of workers in Cananea, excessive concessions to the United States, and an unhealthy centralization of politics around the person of the president. Madero called for a return of the Liberal 1857 Constitution. To achieve this, Madero proposed organizing a Democratic Party under the slogan "Sufragio efectivo, no reelección" ("Effective Suffrage. No Re-election"). Porfirio Díaz could either run in a free election or retire.
Madero's book was well received, and widely read. Many people began to call Madero "the Apostle of Democracy". Madero sold off much of his property – often at a considerable loss – in order to finance anti-re-election activities throughout Mexico. He founded the Anti-Re-election Center in Mexico City in May 1909, and soon thereafter lent his backing to the periodical "El Antirreeleccionista", which was run by the young lawyer/philosopher José Vasconcelos and another intellectual, Luis Cabrera Lobato. In Puebla, Aquiles Serdán, from a politically engaged family, contacted Madero and as a result, formed an Anti-Re-electionist Club to organize for the 1910 elections, particularly among the working classes. Madero traveled throughout Mexico giving anti-reelectionist speeches, and everywhere he went he was greeted by crowds of thousands. His candidacy cost him financially, since he sold much of his property at a loss to back his campaign.
In spite of the attacks by Madero and his earlier statements to the contrary, Díaz ran for re-election. In a show of U.S. support, Díaz and William Howard Taft planned a summit in El Paso, Texas, and Ciudad Juárez, Chihuahua, for 16 October 1909, a historic first meeting between a Mexican and a U.S. president and also the first time a U.S. president would cross the border into Mexico. At the meeting, Diaz told John Hays Hammond, "Since I am responsible for bringing several billion dollars in foreign investments into my country, I think I should continue in my position until a competent successor is found." The summit was a great success for Díaz, but it could have been a major tragedy. On the day of the summit, Frederick Russell Burnham, the celebrated scout, and Private C.R. Moore, a Texas Ranger, discovered a man holding a concealed palm pistol along the procession route and they disarmed the assassin within only a few feet of Díaz and Taft.
The Porfirian regime reacted to Madero by placing pressure on the Madero family's banking interests, and at one point even issued a warrant for Madero's arrest on the grounds of "unlawful transaction in rubber". Madero was not arrested, though, apparently due in part to the intervention of Díaz's finance minister, José Yves Limantour, a friend of the Madero family. In April 1910, the Anti-Re-electionist Party met and selected Madero as their nominee for President of Mexico.
During the convention, a meeting between Madero and Díaz was arranged by the governor of Veracruz, Teodoro Dehesa, and took place in Díaz's residence on 16 April 1910. Only the candidate and the president were present for the meeting, so the only account of it is Madero's own in correspondence. A political solution and compromise might have been possible, with Madero withdrawing his candidacy. It became clear to Madero that Díaz was a decrepit old man, out of touch politically, and unaware of the extent of formal political opposition. The meeting was important for strengthening Madero's resolve that political compromise was not possible and he is quoted as saying "Porfirio is not an imposing chief. Nevertheless, it will be necessary to start a revolution to overthrow him. But who will crush it afterwards?" Madero was worried that Porfirio Díaz would not willingly relinquish office, warned his supporters of the possibility of electoral fraud and proclaimed that "Force shall be met by force!"
Madero campaigned across the country on a message of reform and met with numerous supporters. Resentful of the "peaceful invasion" from the United States "which came to control 90 percent of Mexico's mineral resources, its national railroad, its oil industry and, increasingly, its land," Mexico's poor and middle-class overwhelmingly showed their support for Madero. Fearful of a dramatic change in direction, on 6 June 1910, the Porfirian regime arrested Madero in Monterrey and sent him to a prison in San Luis Potosí. Approximately 5,000 other members of the Anti-Re-electionist movement were also jailed. Francisco Vázquez Gómez took over the nomination, but during Madero's time in jail, a fraudulent election was held on 21 June 1910 that gave Díaz an unbelievably large margin of victory.
Madero's father used his influence with the state governor and posted bond to give Madero the right to move about the city on horseback during the day. On 4 October 1910, Madero galloped away from his guards and took refuge with sympathizers in a nearby village. Three days later he was smuggled across the U.S. border, hidden in a baggage car by sympathetic railway workers.
Madero set up shop in San Antonio, Texas, and quickly issued his Plan of San Luis Potosí, which had been written during his time in prison, partly with the help of Ramón López Velarde. The plan proclaimed the elections of 1910 null and void, and called for an armed revolution to begin at 6 pm on 20 November 1910, against the "illegitimate presidency/dictatorship of Díaz". At that point, Madero declared himself provisional President of Mexico, and called for a general refusal to acknowledge the central government, restitution of land to villages and Indian communities, and freedom for political prisoners. Madero's policies painted him as a leader of each of the different castes in Mexican society at the time. He was a member of the upper class; the middle class saw that he sought to gain entry into political processes; the lower class saw that he promised fairer politics and a much more substantial, equitable economic system.
The family drew on its financial resources to make regime change possible, with Madero's brother Gustavo A. Madero hiring the law firm of Washington lawyer Sherburne Hopkins, the "world's best rigger of Latin American revolutions" to foment support in the U.S. A strategy to discredit Díaz with U.S. business and the U.S. government did meet some success, with Standard Oil engaging in talks with Gustavo Madero, but more importantly, the U.S. government "bent neutrality laws for the revolutionaries." The U.S. Senate held hearings in 1913 as to whether the U.S. had any role in fomenting revolution in Mexico, Hopkins gave testimony that "he did not believe that it cost the Maderos themselves more than $400,000 gold", with the aggregate cost being $1,500,000US.
On 20 November 1910, Madero arrived at the border and planned to meet up with 400 men raised by his uncle Catarino to launch an attack on Ciudad Porfirio Díaz (modern-day Piedras Negras, Coahuila). However, his uncle arrived late and brought only ten men. Madero decided to postpone the revolution. Instead, he and his brother Raúl (who had been given the same name as his late brother) traveled incognito to New Orleans, Louisiana.
On 14 February 1911, Madero crossed the border into Chihuahua state from Texas, and on 6 March 1911 led 130 men in an attack on Casas Grandes, Chihuahua. Madero was reported wounded in the fighting, but was saved by his personal bodyguard and Revolutionary general Máximo Castillo. He spent the next several months as the head of the Mexican Revolution. Madero successfully imported arms from the United States, with the American government under William Howard Taft doing little to halt the flow of arms to the Mexican revolutionaries. By April the Revolution had spread to eighteen states, including Morelos where the leader was Emiliano Zapata.
On 1 April 1911, Porfirio Díaz claimed that he had heard the voice of the people of Mexico, replaced his cabinet, and agreed to restitution of the lands of the dispossessed. Madero did not believe this statement and instead demanded the resignation of President Díaz and Vice-President Ramón Corral. Madero then attended a meeting with the other revolutionary leaders – they agreed to a fourteen-point plan which called for pay for revolutionary soldiers; the release of political prisoners; and the right of the revolutionaries to name several members of cabinet. Madero was moderate, however. He believed that the revolutionaries should proceed cautiously so as to minimize bloodshed and should strike a deal with Díaz if possible. In early May, Madero wanted to extend a ceasefire, but his fellow revolutionaries Pascual Orozco and Francisco Villa disagreed and went ahead without orders on 8 May to attack Ciudad Juárez, which surrendered after two days of bloody fighting. The revolutionaries won this battle decisively, making it clear that Díaz could no longer retain power. On 21 May 1911, the Treaty of Ciudad Juárez was signed.
Under the terms of the Treaty of Ciudad Juárez, Díaz and Corral agreed to resign by the end of May 1911, with Díaz's Minister of Foreign Affairs, Francisco León de la Barra, becoming interim president solely for the purpose of calling general elections.
This first phase of the Mexican Revolution thus ended with Díaz leaving for exile in Europe at the end of May 1911, escorted into exile by General Victoriano Huerta. On 7 June 1911, Madero entered Mexico City in triumph where he was greeted with huge crowds shouting "¡Viva Madero!"
Although Madero and his supporters had forced Porfirio Díaz from power, he did not assume the presidency in June 1911. Instead, following the terms of the Treaty of Ciudad Juárez, he was a candidate for president and had no formal role in the Interim Presidency of Francisco León de la Barra, a diplomat and lawyer. Left in place was the Congress of Mexico, which was full of candidates whom Díaz had handpicked for the 1910 election. By doing this, Madero was true to his ideological commitment to constitutional democracy, but with members of the Díaz regime still in power, he was caused difficulties in the short and long term. The German ambassador to Mexico, Paul von Hintze, who associated with the Interim President, said of him that "De la Barra wants to accommodate himself with dignity to the inevitable advance of the ex-revolutionary influence, while accelerating the widespread collapse of the Madero party..." Madero sought to be a moderate democrat and follow the course outlined in treaty bringing about exile of Díaz, but by calling for the disarming and demobilization of his revolutionary base, he undermined his support. The Mexican Federal Army, just defeated by the revolutionaries, was to continue as the armed force of the Mexican state. Madero argued that the revolutionaries should henceforth proceed solely by peaceful means. In the south, revolutionary leader Emiliano Zapata was skeptical about disbanding his troops, especially since the Federal Army from the Díaz era remained essentially intact. However, Madero traveled south to meet with Zapata at Cuernavaca and Cuautla, Morelos. Madero assured Zapata that the land redistribution promised in the Plan of San Luis Potosí would be carried out when Madero became president.
With Madero now campaigning for the presidency, which he was expected to win, several landowners from Zapata's state of Morelos took advantage of his not being head of state and appealed to President De la Barra and the Congress to restore their lands which had been seized by Zapatista revolutionaries. They spread exaggerated stories of atrocities committed by Zapata's irregulars, calling Zapata the "Attila of the South". De la Barra and the Congress, therefore, decided to send regular troops under Victoriano Huerta to suppress Zapata's revolutionaries. Madero once again traveled south to urge Zapata to disband his supporters peacefully, but Zapata refused on the grounds that Huerta's troops were advancing on Yautepec. Zapata's suspicions proved accurate as Huerta's Federal soldiers moved violently into Yautepec. Madero wrote to De la Barra, saying that Huerta's actions were unjustified and recommending that Zapata's demands be met. However, when he left the south, he had achieved nothing. Nevertheless, he promised the Zapatistas that once he became president, things would change. Most Zapatistas had grown suspicious of Madero, however.
Madero became president in November 1911, and, intending to reconcile the nation, appointed a cabinet which included many of Porfirio Díaz's supporters. A curious fact is that almost immediately after taking office in November, Madero became the first head of state in the world to fly in an airplane, which the Mexican press was later to mock. Madero was unable to achieve the reconciliation he desired since conservative Porfirians had organized themselves during the interim presidency and now mounted a sustained and effective opposition to Madero's reform program. Conservatives in the Senate refused to pass the reforms he advocated. At the same time, several of Madero's allies denounced him for being overly conciliatory with the Porfirians and with not moving aggressively forward with reforms.
After years of censorship, Mexican newspapers took advantage of their newly found freedom of the press to harshly criticize Madero's performance as president. Gustavo A. Madero, the president's brother, remarked that "the newspapers bite the hand that took off their muzzle." President Madero refused the recommendation of some of his advisors that he bring back censorship. The press was particularly critical of Madero's handling of rebellions that broke out against his rule shortly after he became president.
Despite internal and external opposition, the Madero administration had a number of important accomplishments, including freedom of the press. He freed political prisoners and abolished the death penalty. He did away with the practice of the Díaz government, which appointed local political bosses ("jefes políticos"), and instead set up a system of independent municipal authorities. State elections were free and fair. He was concerned about the improvement of education, establishing new schools and workshops. An important step was the creation of a federal department of labor, limited the workday to 10 hours, and set in place regulations on women's and children's labor. Unions were granted the right to freely organize. The "Casa del Obrero Mundial" ("House of the World Worker"), an organization with anarcho-syndicalist was founded during his presidency.
Madero alienated a number of his political supporters when he created a new political party, the Constitutionalist Progressive party, which replaced the Anti-Reelectionist Party. He ousted leftist Emilio Vázquez Gómez from his cabinet, brother of Francisco Vázquez Gómez, whom Madero had replaced as his vice presidential candidate with Pino Suárez.
Madero retained the Mexican Federal Army and ordered the demobilization of revolutionary forces. For revolutionaries who considered themselves the reason that Díaz resigned, this was a hard course to follow. Since Madero did not implement immediate, radical reforms that many of those had supported him had expected, he lost control of those areas in Morelos and Chihuahua. A series of internal rebellions challenged Madero's presidency before the February 1913 coup that deposed him.
In Morelos, Emiliano Zapata proclaimed the Plan of Ayala on 25 November 1911, which excoriated Madero's slowness on land reform. Zapata's plan recognized Pascual Orozco as fellow revolutionary, although Orozco was for the moment loyal to Madero, until 1912.
In December 1911, Bernardo Reyes (the popular general whom Porfirio Díaz had sent to Europe on a diplomatic mission because Díaz worried that Reyes was going to challenge him for the presidency) launched a rebellion in Nuevo León, where he had previously served as governor. Reyes's rebellion lasted only eleven days before Reyes surrendered at Linares, Nuevo León, and was sent to the Santiago Tlatelolco prison in Mexico City.
In March 1912, Madero's former general Pascual Orozco, who was personally resentful of how President Madero had treated him once he was in office, launched a rebellion in Chihuahua with the financial backing of Luis Terrazas, a former Governor of Chihuahua who was the largest landowner in Mexico. Madero dispatched troops under General José González Salas to put down the rebellion, but they were initially defeated by Orozco's troops. González Salas committed suicide and General Victoriano Huerta assumed control of the federalist forces. Huerta was more successful, defeating Orozco's troops in three major battles and forcing Orozco to flee to the United States in September 1912.
Relations between Huerta and Madero grew strained during the course of this campaign when Pancho Villa, the commander of the "División del Norte", refused orders from General Huerta. Huerta ordered Villa's execution, but Madero commuted the sentence and Villa was sent to the same Santiago Tlatelolco prison as Reyes from which he escaped on Christmas Day 1912. Angry at Madero's commutation of Villa's sentence, Huerta, after a long night of drinking, mused about reaching an agreement with Orozco and together deposing Madero as president. When Mexico's Minister of War learned of General Huerta's comments, he stripped Huerta of his command, but Madero intervened and restored Huerta to command.
October 1912, Félix Díaz (nephew of Porfirio Díaz) launched a rebellion in Veracruz, "to reclaim the honor of the army trampled by Madero." This rebellion was quickly crushed and Félix Díaz was imprisoned. Madero was prepared to have Félix Díaz executed, but the Supreme Court of Mexico declared that Félix Díaz would be imprisoned, but not executed.
In early 1913, General Félix Díaz (Porfirio Díaz's nephew) and General Bernardo Reyes plotted the overthrow of Madero, with the support of US Ambassador Henry Lane Wilson. Now known in Mexican history as the Ten Tragic Days, from 9 February to 19 February events in the capital led to the overthrow and murder of Madero and his vice president. Rebel forces bombarded the National Palace and downtown Mexico City from the military arsenal ("ciudadela"). Madero's loyalists initially held their ground, but Madero's commander, General Victoriano Huerta secretly switched sides to support the rebels. Madero's decision to appoint General Victoriano Huerta as commander of forces in Mexico City was one "for which he would pay for with his life." Madero and his vice president were arrested. Under pressure Madero resigned the presidency, with the expectation that he would go into exile, as had President Díaz in May 1911. Madero's brother and advisor Gustavo A. Madero was kidnapped off the street, tortured, and killed. Following Huerta's coup d'état on 18 February 1913, Madero was forced to resign. After a 45-minute term of office, Pedro Lascuráin was replaced by Huerta, who took over the presidency later that day.
Following his forced resignation, Madero and his Vice-President José María Pino Suárez were kept under guard in the National Palace. On the evening of 22 February, they were told that they were to be transferred to the main city penitentiary, where they would be safer. At 11:15 pm, reporters waiting outside the National Palace saw two cars containing Madero and Suárez emerge from the main gate under a heavy escort commanded by Major Francisco Cárdenas, an officer of the rurales. The journalists on foot were outdistanced by the motor vehicles, which were driven towards the penitentiary. The correspondent for the "New York World" was approaching the prison when he heard a volley of shots. Behind the building, he found the two cars with the bodies of Madero and Suárez nearby, surrounded by soldiers and gendarmes. Major Cárdenas subsequently told reporters that the cars and their escort had been fired on by a group, as they neared the penitentiary. The two prisoners had leapt from the vehicles and ran towards their presumed rescuers. They had however been killed in the cross-fire. This account was treated with general disbelief, although the American ambassador Henry Lane Wilson, a strong supporter of Huerta, reported to Washington that, "I am disposed to accept the (Huerta) government's version of the affair and consider it a closed incident".
President Madero, dead at 39, was buried quietly in the French cemetery of Mexico City. A series of contemporary photographs taken by Manuel Ramos show Maderos's coffin being carried from the penitentiary and placed on a special funeral tram car for transportation to the cemetery. Only his close family were permitted to attend, leaving for Cuba immediately after. Ambassador Wilson was later dismissed from his position after US president Woodrow Wilson took office. Following Huerta's overthrow, Francisco Cárdenas fled to Guatemala where he committed suicide in 1920 after the new Mexican government had requested his extradition to stand trial for the murder of Madero.
There was shock at Madero's murder, but there were many, Mexican elites and foreign entrepreneurs and governments, who saw the coup and the emergence of Victoriano Huerta as the desired strongman to return order to Mexico. Among elites in Mexico, Madero's death was a cause of rejoicing, seeing the time since Díaz's resignation as one of political instability and economic uncertainty. Ordinary Mexicans in the capital, however, were dismayed by the coup, since many considered Madero a friend, but their feelings did not translate into concrete action against the Huerta regime. In northern Mexico, Madero's overthrow and martyrdom united forces against Huerta's usurpation of power. Governor of Coahuila, Venustiano Carranza refused to support the new regime although most state governors had. He brought together a coalition of revolutionaries under the banner of the Mexican Constitution, so that the Constitutionalist Army fought for the principles of constitutional democracry that Madero embraced. In southern Mexico, Zapata had been in rebellion against the Madero government for its slow action on land reform and continued in rebellion against the Huerta regime. However, Zapata repudiated his former high opinion of fellow revolutionary Pascual Orozco, who had also rebelled against Madero, when Orozco allied with Huerta. Madero's anti-reelectionist movement had mobilized revolutionary action that led to the resignation of Díaz. Madero's overthrow and murder during the Ten Tragic Days was a prelude to further years of civil war.
Madero was known as "The Apostle of Democracy," but "Madero the martyr meant more to the soul of Mexico."
Despite Madero's importance as a historical figure, there are relatively few memorials or monuments to him. It was not until the Monument to the Revolution was completed in 1938 that Madero had a public resting place. He had been interred in the French cemetery in Mexico City. After his death. His tomb had been an informal pilgrimage site on the anniversary of his murder (22 February) and the proclamation of his Plan of San Luis Potosí (20 November), which launched the Mexican Revolution. Initially, the monument to the Revolution held the remains of Madero, Carranza, and Villa and was planned as a collective commemoration of the Revolution, not individual revolutionaries. Although it was completed on 20 November 1938, there was no inaugural ceremony.
The date of Madero's Plan of San Luis Potosí, 20 November, was a fixed official holiday in Mexico, Revolution Day, but a 2005 change in the law makes the third Monday in November the day of commemoration. During the Presidency of Venustiano Carranza, he ignored 20 November and commemorated 26 March, the anniversary of his Plan de Guadalupe.
The Mexico City Metro has a stop named for Madero's vice president, Metro Pino Suárez, but not one to Madero. General Alvaro Obregón laid a foundation stone on the 10th anniversary of Madero's death of a planned Madero statue in the zócalo, but the statue was never built. A statue was erected in 1956 at a downtown intersection in Mexico City and has been moved to the presidential residence, Los Pinos, not easily viewable by the public. An exception is Avenida Madero in Mexico City. One contemporaneous honor by General Pancho Villa remains in Mexico City. On the morning of 8 December 1914, he declared that the street leading from the Zócalo in Mexico City towards the Paseo de la Reforma would be named for Madero. Still officially called Francisco I. Madero Avenue, but commonly known simply as Madero street, it is one of the most popular and historically significant streets in the city. It was pedestrianised in 2009.
Mexican artist José Guadalupe Posada created an etching for a broadside, produced on the occasion of Madero's election in 1910, titled "Calavera de Madero" portraying Madero as a calavera.
Madero appears in the films "Viva Villa!" (1934), "Villa Rides" (1968) and "Viva Zapata!" (1952).
In the novel "The Friends of Pancho Villa" (1996) by James Carlos Blake, Madero is a major character.

</doc>
<doc id="11286" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11286" title="Fruitarianism">
Fruitarianism

Fruitarianism () is a subset of dietary veganism that consists of a diet of entirely or primarily fruits in the botanical sense, and possibly nuts and seeds, but without animal products. Fruitarian diets are subject to numerous criticisms and health concerns.
Fruitarianism may be adopted for different reasons, including ethical, religious, environmental, cultural, economic, and health. There are several varieties of the diet. Some people with a diet consisting of 75% or more fruit may consider themselves fruitarians.
The health benefits of a fruitarian diet is not supported by scientific evidence; in fact, the diet increases the risk of nutritional deficiencies such as vitamin B12, calcium, iron, zinc, omega-3 and protein. 
Some fruitarians will eat only what falls (or would fall) naturally from a plant: that is, plant foods that can be harvested without killing or harming the plant. These foods consist primarily of culinary fruits, nuts, and seeds. According to author Adam Gollner, some fruitarians eat only fallen fruit. Some do not eat grains, believing it is unnatural to do so, and some fruitarians feel that it is improper for humans to eat seeds as they contain future plants, or nuts and seeds, or any food besides juicy fruit. Others believe they should eat only plants that spread seeds when the plant is eaten. Others eat seeds and some cooked foods. Some fruitarians use the botanical definitions of fruits and consume pulses, such as beans, peas, or other legumes. Other fruitarians' diets include raw fruits, dried fruits, nuts, honey and olive oil, nuts, beans and/or chocolate.
Some fruitarians wish, like Jains, to avoid killing anything, including plants, and refer to ahimsa fruitarianism. For some fruitarians, the motivation comes from a fixation on a utopian past, their hope being to return to a past that pre-dates an agrarian society to when humans were simply hunter gatherers. Another common motivation is the desire to eliminate perceived toxicity from within the body. For others, the appeal of a fruitarian diet comes from the challenge that the restrictive nature of this diet provides.
According to nutritionists, adults must be careful not to follow a fruit-only diet for too long. A fruitarian diet is wholly unsuitable for children (including teens), and several children have died due to having fruitarian diets imposed on them.
Fruitarianism is even more restrictive than veganism or raw veganism. Maintaining this diet over a long period can result in dangerous deficiencies, a risk that many fruitarians try to ward off through nutritional testing and vitamin injections. The Health Promotion Program at Columbia University reports that a fruitarian diet can cause deficiencies in calcium, protein, iron, zinc, vitamin D, most B vitamins (especially B), and essential fatty acids.
Although fruit provides a source of carbohydrates, they have very little protein, and because protein cannot be stored in the body as fat and carbohydrates can, fruitarians need to be careful that they consume enough protein each day. When the body does not take in enough protein, it misses out on amino acids, which are essential to making body proteins which support the growth and maintenance of body tissues. Consuming high levels of fruit also poses a risk to those who are diabetic or pre-diabetic, due to the negative effect that the large amounts of sugar in fruits has on blood sugar levels. These high levels of sugar mean that fruitarians are at high risk for tooth decay. Another concern that fruitarianism presents is that because fruit is easily digested, the body burns through meals quickly, and is hungry again soon after eating. A side effect of the digestibility is that the body will defecate more frequently.
Additionally, the Health Promotion Program at Columbia reports that food restrictions in general may lead to hunger, cravings, food obsessions, social disruptions, and social isolation. The severe dietary restrictions inherent in a fruitarian regime also carries the serious risk of triggering orthorexia nervosa.
Harriet Hall has written that a fruitarian diet "leads to nutritional deficiencies, especially in children. Fruitarians can develop protein energy malnutrition, anemia, and low levels of iron, calcium, essential fatty acids, vitamins, and minerals."
Vitamin B, a bacterial product, cannot be obtained from fruits. According to the U.S. National Institutes of Health "natural food sources of vitamin B are limited to foods that come from animals." Like raw vegans who do not consume B-fortified foods (for example, certain plant milks and some breakfast cereals), fruitarians may need to include a B supplement in their diet or risk vitamin B deficiency.
In children, growth and development may be at risk. Some nutritionists state that children should not follow a fruitarian diet. Nutritional problems include severe protein–energy malnutrition, anemia and deficiencies including protein, iron, calcium, essential fatty acids, raw fibre and a wide range of vitamins and minerals.
Some notable advocates of fruitarianism, or of diets which may be considered fruitarian, or of lifestyles including such a diet, are:

</doc>
<doc id="11288" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11288" title="Foreign relations of Afghanistan">
Foreign relations of Afghanistan

Foreign relations of Afghanistan are handled by the nation's Ministry of Foreign Affairs, which is headed by Mohammad Hanif Atmar. He answers to, and receives guidance from, the President of Afghanistan, Ashraf Ghani.
The Islamic Republic of Afghanistan has close and friendly relations with a number of countries around the world, including: Turkey, United States, United Kingdom, Japan, Germany, Spain, South Korea, Italy, India, China, Canada, United Arab Emirates and many others.
Before the Soviet invasion, Afghanistan pursued a policy of neutrality and nonalignment rein its foreign relations, being one of a few independent nations to stay neutral in both World War I and World War II. In international forums, Afghanistan generally followed the voting patterns of Asian and African non-aligned countries. During the 1950s and 1960s, Afghanistan was able to use the Russian and American need for allies during the Cold War as a way to receive economic assistance from both countries. However, given that unlike Russia, America refused to give extensive military aid to the country, the government of Daoud Khan developed warmer ties with the USSR while officially remaining non-aligned. Following the coup of April 1978, the government under Nur Muhammad Taraki developed significantly closer ties with the Soviet Union and its communist satellites.
After the December 1979 Soviet invasion, Afghanistan's foreign policy mirrored that of the Soviet Union. Afghan foreign policymakers attempted, with little success, to increase their regime's low standing in the noncommunist world. With the signing of the Geneva Accords, President Najibullah unsuccessfully sought to end the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan's isolation within the Islamic world and in the Non-Aligned Movement.
Most Western countries, including the United States, maintained small diplomatic missions in the capital city of Kabul during the Soviet occupation. Many countries subsequently closed their missions due to instability and heavy fighting in Kabul after the Soviet withdrawal in 1989.
Many countries initially welcomed the introduction of the Taliban regime, who they saw as a stabilising, law-enforcing alternative to the warlords who had ruled the country since the fall of Najibullah's government in 1992. The Taliban soon became alienated of those countries' positive feelings with knowledge of the harsh Sharia law being enforced in Taliban-controlled territories spreading around the world. The brutality towards women who attempted to work, learn, or leave the house without a male escort caused outside aid to the war-torn country to be limited.
Following the October 2001 American invasion and the Bonn Agreement the new government under the leadership of Hamid Karzai started to re-establish diplomatic relationships with many countries who had held close diplomatic relations before the communist coup d'état and the subsequent civil war.
The Afghan government is focused on securing continued assistance for rebuilding the economy, infrastructure, and military of the country. It has continued to maintain close ties with North America, the European Union, South Korea, Japan, Australia, India, China, Russia and the Greater Middle East as well as African nations. It also seeks to establish relations with more South American or Latin American nations. In late 2011, relations between Afghanistan and Dominican Republic were established.
During the Soviet occupation, the United Nations was highly critical of the U.S.S.R.'s interference in the internal affairs of Afghanistan and was instrumental in obtaining a negotiated Soviet withdrawal under the terms of the Geneva Accords.
In the aftermath of the Accords and subsequent Soviet withdrawal, the United Nations has assisted in the repatriation of refugees and has provided humanitarian aid such as health care, educational programs, and food and has supported mine-clearing operations. The UNDP and associated agencies have undertaken a limited number of development projects. However, the UN reduced its role in Afghanistan in 1992 in the wake of fierce factional strife in and around Kabul. The UN Secretary General has designated a personal representative to head the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Assistance to Afghanistan (UNOCHA) and the Special Mission to Afghanistan (UNSMA), both based in Islamabad, Pakistan. Throughout the late 1990s, 2000, and 2001, the UN unsuccessfully strived to promote a peaceful settlement between the Afghan factions as well as provide humanitarian aid, this despite increasing Taliban restrictions upon UN personnel and agencies.

</doc>
<doc id="11291" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11291" title="Floccinaucinihilipilification">
Floccinaucinihilipilification


</doc>
<doc id="11293" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11293" title="Felony">
Felony

The term felony originated from English common law (from the French medieval word "félonie"), to describe an offense that resulted in the confiscation of a convicted person's land and goods, to which additional punishments including capital punishment could be added. Other crimes were called "misdemeanors". A felony is traditionally considered a crime of high seriousness, whereas a misdemeanor is regarded as less serious. Following conviction of a felony in a court of law, a person may be described as a convicted felon/felon. The centuries-old stigma of loss of wealth, status and speculated extreme gravity to the crime sees those personal descriptions widely deprecated, in favour of ex-convict or ex-criminal.
Some common law countries and jurisdictions no longer classify crimes as felonies or misdemeanors and instead use other distinctions, such as by classifying serious crimes as indictable offences and less serious crimes as summary offences.
In the United States, where the felony/misdemeanor distinction is still widely applied, the federal government defines a felony as a crime punishable by death or imprisonment in excess of one year. If punishable by exactly one year or less, it is classified as a misdemeanor. The classification is based upon a crime's potential sentence, so a crime remains classified as a felony even if a defendant receives a sentence of less than a year of incarceration. Individual states may classify crimes by other factors, such as seriousness or context.
In some civil law jurisdictions, such as Italy and Spain, the term "delict" is used to describe serious offenses, a category similar to common law felony. In other nations, such as Germany, France, Belgium, and Switzerland, more serious offenses are described as "crimes", while "misdemeanors" or "delicts" (or délits) are less serious. In still others (such as Brazil and Portugal), "crimes" and "delicts" are synonymous (more serious) and are opposed to contraventions (less serious).
Felonies include but are not limited to the following:
Broadly, felonies can be characterized as either violent or nonviolent:
Some offenses, though similar in nature, may be felonies or misdemeanors depending on the circumstances. For example, the illegal manufacture, distribution or possession of controlled substances may be a felony, although possession of small amounts may be only a misdemeanor. Possession of a deadly weapon may be generally legal, but carrying the same weapon into a restricted area such as a school may be viewed as a serious offense, regardless of whether there is intent to use the weapon. Additionally, driving under the influence in some states may be a misdemeanor if a first offense, but a felony on subsequent offenses.
A felony may be punishable with imprisonment for two or more years or death in the case of the most serious felonies, such as murder. Indeed, historically at common law, felonies were crimes punishable by either death or forfeiture of property. All felonies remain a serious crime, but concerns of proportionality (i.e., that the punishment fit the crime) have in modern times prompted legislatures to require or permit the imposition of less serious punishments, ranging from lesser terms of imprisonment to the substitution of a jail sentence or even the suspension of all incarceration contingent upon a defendant's successful completion of probation. Standards for measurement of an offense's seriousness include attempts to quantitatively estimate and compare the effects of a crime upon its specific victims or upon society generally.
In some states, all or most felonies are placed into one of various classes according to their seriousness and their potential punishment upon conviction. The number of classifications and the corresponding crimes vary by state and are determined by the legislature. Usually, the legislature also determines the maximum punishment allowable for each felony class; doing so avoids the necessity of defining specific sentences for every possible crime. For example:
Sir William Blackstone wrote that felony "comprises every species of crime, which occasioned at common law the forfeiture of lands or goods". The word "felony" was feudal in origin, denoting the value of a man's entire property: "the consideration for which a man gives up his fief". Blackstone refutes the misconception that felony simply means an offense punishable by death, by demonstrating that not every felony is capital, and not every capital offense is a felony. However he concedes that "the idea of felony is indeed so generally connected with that of capital punishment, that we find it hard to separate them; and to this usage the interpretations of the law do now conform."
The death penalty for felony could be avoided by pleading benefit of clergy, which gradually evolved to exempt everybody (whether clergy or not) from that punishment for a first offense, except for high treason and offenses expressly excluded by statute. During the 19th century criminal law reform incrementally reduced the number of capital offenses to five "(see Capital punishment in the United Kingdom)", and forfeiture for felony was abolished by the Forfeiture Act 1870. Consequently, the distinction between felony and misdemeanor became increasingly arbitrary. The surviving differences consisted of different rules of evidence and procedure, and the Law Commission recommended that felonies be abolished altogether. This was done by the Criminal Law Act 1967, which made all felonies (except treason) misdemeanours, and introduced a new system of classifying crimes as either "arrestable" and "non-arrestable" offenses (according to which a general power of arrest was available for crimes punishable by five years' imprisonment or more).
Arrestable offenses were abolished in 2006, and today crimes are classified as indictable or summary offenses.
The Trials for Felony Act 1836 (6 & 7 Will. 4 c. 114) allowed persons indicted for felonies to be represented by counsel or attorney.
A person being prosecuted for this was called a prisoner, though increasing an "accused" or "defendant" was preferred.
In the law of the Republic of Ireland the distinction between felony and misdemeanor was abolished by section 3 of the Criminal Law Act, 1997, such that the law previously applied to misdemeanours was extended to all offences. Minister Joan Burton, introducing the bill in the Seanad, said "The distinction has been eroded over many years and in today's conditions has no real relevance. Today, for example, serious offences such as fraudulent conversion and obtaining property by false pretences are classified as misdemeanours whereas a relatively trivial offence such as stealing a bar of chocolate is a felony." The 1997 Act, modelled on the English Criminal Law Act 1967, introduced the category of "arrestable offence" for those with penalties of five years' imprisonment or greater.
The 1937 Constitution declares that the parliamentary privilege, which protects Oireachtas members from arrest travelling to or from the legislature, does not apply to "treason, felony, and breach of the peace". The 1996 Constitutional Review Group recommended replacing "felony" with "serious criminal offence".
The reform of harsh felony laws that had originated in Great Britain was deemed "one of the first fruits of liberty" after the United States became independent.
In many parts of the United States, a felon can face long-term legal consequences persisting after the end of their imprisonment.
The status and designation as a "felon" is considered permanent, and is not extinguished upon sentence completion even if parole, probation or early release was given. The status can be cleared only by a successful appeal or executive clemency. However, felons may qualify for restoration of some rights after a certain period of time has passed.
The consequences felons face in most states include:
Additionally, many job applications and rental applications ask about felony history (with the exception of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts) and answering dishonestly on them can be grounds for rejecting the application, or termination if the lie is discovered after hire. Convicted felons may not be eligible for certain professional licenses or bonds, or may raise the cost of an employer's insurance. 
It is broadly legal to discriminate against felons in hiring decisions as well as the decision to rent housing to a person, so felons can face barriers to finding both jobs and housing. Many landlords will not rent to felons, although a blanket ban on renting to felons may violate federal housing law. A common term of parole is to avoid associating with other felons. In some neighborhoods with high rates of felony conviction, this creates a situation where many felons live with a constant threat of being arrested for violating parole. Banks may refuse to issue loans to felons, and a felony conviction may prevent employment in banking or finance.
In some states, restoration of those rights depends on repayment of various fees associated with the felon's arrest, processing, and prison stay, such as restitution to victims, or outstanding fines.
The primary means of restoring civil rights that are lost as a result of a felony conviction are executive clemency and Expungement in the United States.
For state law convictions, expungement is determined by the law of the state. Many states do not allow expungement, regardless of the offense, though felons can seek pardons and clemency, potentially including restoration of rights.
Federal law does not have any provisions for persons convicted of federal felonies in a federal United States district court to apply to have their record expunged. At present the only relief that an individual convicted of a felony in federal court may receive is a presidential pardon, which does not expunge the conviction, but rather grants relief from the civil disabilities that stem from it.
Felonies ("Verbrechen") are defined as a crime that is punishable with a minimum of one year's imprisonment. Misdemeanours ("Vergehen") are all other crimes punishable by imprisonment with a minimum of less than one year or by fine.
However, in some cases a severe version misdemeanor may be punished with imprisonment of more than one year, yet the crime itself remains considered a misdemeanor. Same applies for a milder version of a felony that is punishable with imprisonment less than a year.
An attempt to commit a felony is always punishable, whilst an attempt to commit a misdemeanor is solely punishable if particularly prescribed by law.

</doc>
<doc id="11295" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11295" title="Ferdinand of Habsburg">
Ferdinand of Habsburg

Ferdinand of Habsburg may refer to:

</doc>
<doc id="11296" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11296" title="First aid">
First aid

First aid is the first and immediate assistance given to any person suffering from either a minor or serious illness or injury, with care provided to preserve life, prevent the condition from worsening, or to promote recovery. It includes initial intervention in a serious condition prior to professional medical help being available, such as performing cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) while waiting for an ambulance, as well as the complete treatment of minor conditions, such as applying a plaster to a cut. First aid is generally performed by someone with basic medical training. Mental health first aid is an extension of the concept of first aid to cover mental health, while psychological first aid is used as early treatment of people who are at risk for developing PTSD. Conflict First Aid, focused on preservation and recovery of an individual's social or relationship well-being, is being piloted in Canada.
There are many situations which may require first aid, and many countries have legislation, regulation, or guidance which specifies a minimum level of first aid provision in certain circumstances. This can include specific training or equipment to be available in the workplace (such as an automated external defibrillator), the provision of specialist first aid cover at public gatherings, or mandatory first aid training within schools. First aid, however, does not necessarily require any particular equipment or prior knowledge, and can involve improvisation with materials available at the time, often by untrained people.
First aid can be performed on nearly all animals, such as pets, although this article relates to the care of human patients.
Skills of what is now known as first aid have been recorded throughout history, especially in relation to warfare, where the care of both traumatic and medical cases is required in particularly large numbers. The bandaging of battle wounds is shown on Classical Greek pottery from c. 500 BC, whilst the parable of the Good Samaritan includes references to binding or dressing wounds. There are numerous references to first aid performed within the Roman army, with a system of first aid supported by surgeons, field ambulances, and hospitals. Roman legions had the specific role of capsarii, who were responsible for first aid such as bandaging, and are the forerunners of the modern combat medic.
Further examples occur through history, still mostly related to battle, with examples such as the Knights Hospitaller in the 11th century AD, providing care to pilgrims and knights in the Holy Land.
During the late 18th century, drowning as a cause of death was a major concern amongst the population. In 1767, a society for the preservation of life from accidents in water was started in Amsterdam, and in 1773, physician William Hawes began publicizing the power of artificial respiration as means of resuscitation of those who appeared drowned. This led to the formation, in 1774, of the Society for the Recovery of Persons Apparently Drowned, later the Royal Humane Society, who did much to promote resuscitation.
Napoleon's surgeon, Baron Dominique-Jean Larrey, is credited with creating an ambulance corps (the ambulance volantes), which included medical assistants, tasked to administer first aid in battle.
In 1859 Jean-Henri Dunant witnessed the aftermath of the Battle of Solferino, and his work led to the formation of the Red Cross, with a key stated aim of "aid to sick and wounded soldiers in the field". The Red Cross and Red Crescent are still the largest provider of first aid worldwide.
In 1870, Prussian military surgeon Friedrich von Esmarch introduced formalized first aid to the military, and first coined the term "erste hilfe" (translating to 'first aid'), including training for soldiers in the Franco-Prussian War on care for wounded comrades using pre-learnt bandaging and splinting skills, and making use of the Esmarch bandage which he designed. The bandage was issued as standard to the Prussian combatants, and also included aide-memoire pictures showing common uses.
In 1872, the Order of Saint John of Jerusalem in England changed its focus from hospice care, and set out to start a system of practical medical help, starting with making a grant towards the establishment of the UK's first ambulance service. This was followed by creating its own wheeled transport litter in 1875 (the St John Ambulance), and in 1877 established the St John Ambulance Association (the forerunner of modern-day St John Ambulance) "to train men and women for the benefit of the sick and wounded".
Also in the UK, Surgeon-Major Peter Shepherd had seen the advantages of von Esmarch's new teaching of first aid, and introduced an equivalent programme for the British Army, and so being the first user of "first aid for the injured" in English, disseminating information through a series of lectures. Following this, in 1878, Shepherd and Colonel Francis Duncan took advantage of the newly charitable focus of St John, and established the concept of teaching first aid skills to civilians. The first classes were conducted in the hall of the Presbyterian school in Woolwich (near Woolwich barracks where Shepherd was based) using a comprehensive first aid curriculum.
First aid training began to spread through the British Empire through organisations such as St John, often starting, as in the UK, with high risk activities such as ports and railways.
The primary goal of first aid is to prevent death or serious injury from worsening. The key aims of first aid can be summarized with the acronym of 'the three Ps':
Preserve life:: The overriding aim of all medical care which includes first aid, is to save lives and minimize the threat of death. First aid done correctly should help reduce the patient's level of pain and calm them down during the evaluation and treatment process.
Prevent further harm: Prevention of further harm includes addressing both external factors, such as moving a patient away from any cause of harm, and applying first aid techniques to prevent worsening of the condition, such as applying pressure to stop a bleed becoming dangerous.
Promote recovery: First aid also involves trying to start the recovery process from the illness or injury, and in some cases might involve completing a treatment, such as in the case of applying a plaster to a small wound.
It is important to note that first aid is not medical treatment and cannot be compared with what a trained medical professional provides. First aid involves making common sense decisions in best interest of an injured person.
Protocols such as ATLS, BATLS, SAFE-POINT are based on the principle of defining the priorities and the procedure where the correct execution of the individual steps achieves the required objective of saving human life. Basic points of these protocols include:
A major benefit of these protocols is that they require minimum resources, time and skills with a great degree of success in saving lives under conditions unfavourable for applying first aid.
Certain skills are considered essential to the provision of first aid and are taught ubiquitously. Particularly the "ABC"s of first aid, which focus on critical life-saving intervention, must be rendered before treatment of less serious injuries. ABC stands for "Airway", "Breathing", and "Circulation". The same mnemonic is used by emergency health professionals. Attention must first be brought to the airway to ensure it is clear. Obstruction (choking) is a life-threatening emergency. Following evaluation of the airway, a first aid attendant would determine adequacy of breathing and provide rescue breathing if necessary.
Assessment of circulation is now not usually carried out for patients who are not breathing, with first aiders now trained to go straight to chest compressions (and thus providing artificial circulation) but pulse checks may be done on less serious patients.
Some organizations add a fourth step of "D" for "Deadly bleeding" or "Defibrillation", while others consider this as part of the "Circulation" step simply referred as Disability. Variations on techniques to evaluate and maintain the ABCs depend on the skill level of the first aider. Once the ABCs are secured, first aiders can begin additional treatments or examination, as required if they possess the proper training (such as measuring pupil dilation). Some organizations teach the same order of priority using the "3Bs": "Breathing", "Bleeding", and "Bones" (or "4Bs": "Breathing", "Bleeding", "Burns", and "Bones"). While the ABCs and 3Bs are taught to be performed sequentially, certain conditions may require the consideration of two steps simultaneously. This includes the provision of both artificial respiration and chest compressions to someone who is not breathing and has no pulse, and the consideration of cervical spine injuries when ensuring an open airway.
The patient must have an open airway—that is, an unobstructed passage that allows air to travel from the open mouth or uncongested nose, down through the pharynx and into the lungs. Conscious people maintain their own airway automatically, but those who are unconscious (with a GCS of less than 8) may be unable to do so, as the part of the brain that manages spontaneous breathing may not be functioning.
Whether conscious or not, the patient may be placed in the recovery position, laying on their side. In addition to relaxing the patient, this can have the effect of clearing the tongue from the pharynx. It also avoids a common cause of death in unconscious patients, which is choking on regurgitated stomach contents.
The airway can also become blocked by a foreign object. To dislodge the object and prevent choking, the first aider may use techniques such as ‘back slaps’ and ‘abdominal thrusts’.
Once the airway has been opened, the first aider would reassess the patient's breathing. If there is no breathing, or the patient is not breathing normally (e.g. agonal breathing), the first aider would initiate CPR, which attempts to restart the patient's breathing by forcing air into the lungs. They may also manually massage the heart to promote blood flow around the body.
If the choking person is an infant, the procedure is to deliver five strong blows on the infant's upper back after placing the infant's face in the aider's forearm. If the infant is able to cough or cry, no breathing assistance should be given. Coughing and crying indicate the airway is open and the foreign object will likely to come out from the force the coughing or crying produces.
A first responder should know how to use an Automatic External Defibrillator (AED) in the case of a person having a sudden cardiac arrest. The survival rate of those who suffer a cardiac arrest outside of the hospital is low. Permanent brain damage sets in after 5 minutes of no oxygen delivery, so rapid action on the part of the rescuer is necessary. An AED is a device that can examine a heartbeat and produce electric shocks to restart the heart.
A first aider should be prepared to quickly deal with less severe problems such as cuts, grazes or bone fracture. They may be able to completely resolve a situation if they have the proper training and equipment. For situations that are more severe, complex or dangerous, a first aider might need to do the best they can with the equipment they have, and wait for an ambulance to arrive at the scene.
Basic principles, such as knowing the use of adhesive bandage or applying direct pressure on a bleed, are often acquired passively through life experiences. However, to provide effective, life-saving first aid interventions requires instruction and practical training. This is especially true where it relates to potentially fatal illnesses and injuries, such as those that require CPR; these procedures may be invasive, and carry a risk of further injury to the patient and the provider. As with any training, it is more useful if it occurs "before" an actual emergency, and in many countries, emergency ambulance dispatchers may give basic first aid instructions over the phone while the ambulance is on the way.
Training is generally provided by attending a course, typically leading to certification. Due to regular changes in procedures and protocols, based on updated clinical knowledge, and to maintain skill, attendance at regular refresher courses or re-certification is often necessary. First aid training is often available through community organizations such as the Red Cross and St. John Ambulance, or through commercial providers, who will train people for a fee. This commercial training is most common for training of employees to perform first aid in their workplace. Many community organizations also provide a commercial service, which complements their community programmes.
1.Junior level certificate Basic Life Support
2.Senior level certificate
3.Special certificate
There are several types of first aid (and first aider) which require specific additional training. These are usually undertaken to fulfill the demands of the work or activity undertaken.
Some people undertake specific training in order to provide first aid at public or private events, during filming, or other places where people gather. They may be designated as a first aider, or use some other title. This role may be undertaken on a voluntary basis, with organisations such as the 
1.Red Cross society and 
2.St John Ambulance, or as paid employment with a medical contractor.
People performing a first aid role, whether in a professional or voluntary capacity, are often expected to have a high level of first aid training and are often uniformed.
Although commonly associated with first aid, the symbol of a red cross is an official protective symbol of the Red Cross. According to the Geneva Conventions and other international laws, the use of this and similar symbols is reserved for official agencies of the International Red Cross and Red Crescent, and as a protective emblem for medical personnel and facilities in combat situations. Use by any other person or organization is illegal, and may lead to prosecution.
The internationally accepted symbol for first aid is the white cross on a green background shown below.
Some organizations may make use of the Star of Life, although this is usually reserved for use by ambulance services, or may use symbols such as the Maltese Cross, like the Order of Malta Ambulance Corps and St John Ambulance. Other symbols may also be used.
"Also see Medical emergency."
Many accidents can happen in homes, offices, schools and laboratories which require immediate attention before the patient is attended by the doctor.
A first aid kit consists of a strong, durable bag or transparent plastic box. They are commonly identified with a white cross on a green background. A first aid kit does not have to be bought ready-made. The advantage of ready-made first aid kits are that they have well organized compartments and familiar layouts.
There is no universal agreement upon list for the contents of a first aid kit. The UK Health and Safety Executive stress that the contents of workplace first aid kits will vary according to the nature of the work activities. As an example of possible contents of a kit, British Standard "BS 8599 First Aid Kits for the Workplace" lists the following items:

</doc>
<doc id="11298" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11298" title="Feudalism">
Feudalism

Feudalism was a combination of the legal, economic, military, and cultural customs that flourished in Medieval Europe between the 9th and 15th centuries. Broadly defined, it was a way of structuring society around relationships that were derived from the holding of land in exchange for service or labor.
Although it is derived from the Latin word "feodum" or "feudum" (fief), which was used during the Medieval period, the term "feudalism" and the system which it describes were not conceived of as a formal political system by the people who lived during the Middle Ages. The classic definition, by François-Louis Ganshof (1944), describes a set of reciprocal legal and military obligations which existed among the warrior nobility and revolved around the three key concepts of lords, vassals and fiefs.
A broader definition of feudalism, as described by Marc Bloch (1939), includes not only the obligations of the warrior nobility but the obligations of all three estates of the realm: the nobility, the clergy, and the peasantry, all of whom were bound by a system of manorialism; this is sometimes referred to as a "feudal society". Since the publication of Elizabeth A. R. Brown's "The Tyranny of a Construct" (1974) and Susan Reynolds's "Fiefs and Vassals" (1994), there has been ongoing inconclusive discussion among medieval historians as to whether feudalism is a useful construct for understanding medieval society.
There is no commonly accepted modern definition of feudalism, at least among scholars. The adjective "feudal" was coined in the 17th century, and the noun "feudalism", often used in a political and propaganda context, was not coined until the 19th century, from the French "féodalité" ("feudality"), itself an 18th-century creation.
According to a classic definition by François-Louis Ganshof (1944), "feudalism" describes a set of reciprocal legal and military obligations which existed among the warrior nobility and revolved around the three key concepts of lords, vassals and fiefs, though Ganshof himself noted that his treatment was only related to the "narrow, technical, legal sense of the word".
A broader definition, as described in Marc Bloch's "Feudal Society" (1939), includes not only the obligations of the warrior nobility but the obligations of all three estates of the realm: the nobility, the clergy, and those who lived off their labor, most directly the peasantry which was bound by a system of manorialism; this order is often referred to as a "feudal society", echoing Bloch's usage.
Outside its European context, the concept of feudalism is often used by analogy, most often in discussions of feudal Japan under the "shoguns", and sometimes in discussions of the Zagwe dynasty in medieval Ethiopia, which had some feudal characteristics (sometimes called "semifeudal"). Some have taken the feudalism analogy further, seeing feudalism (or traces of it) in places as diverse as China during the Spring and Autumn period (771-476 BCE), ancient Egypt, the Parthian empire, the Indian subcontinent and the Antebellum and Jim Crow American South. 
The term "feudalism" has also been applied—often inappropriately or pejoratively—to non-Western societies where institutions and attitudes which are similar to those which existed in medieval Europe are perceived to prevail. Some historians and political theorists believe that the term "feudalism" has been deprived of specific meaning by the many ways it has been used, leading them to reject it as a useful concept for understanding society.
The term "féodal" was used in 17th-century French legal treatises (1614) and translated into English legal treatises as an adjective, such as "feodal government".
In the 18th century, Adam Smith, seeking to describe economic systems, effectively coined the forms "feudal government" and "feudal system" in his book "Wealth of Nations" (1776). In the 19th century the adjective "feudal" evolved into a noun: "feudalism". The term "feudalism" is recent, first appearing in French in 1823, Italian in 1827, English in 1839, and in German in the second half of the 19th century.
The term "feudal" or "feodal" is derived from the medieval Latin word "feodum". The etymology of "feodum" is complex with multiple theories, some suggesting a Germanic origin (the most widely held view) and others suggesting an Arabic origin. Initially in medieval Latin European documents, a land grant in exchange for service was called a "beneficium" (Latin). Later, the term "feudum", or "feodum", began to replace "beneficium" in the documents. The first attested instance of this is from 984, although more primitive forms were seen up to one-hundred years earlier. The origin of the "feudum" and why it replaced "beneficium" has not been well established, but there are multiple theories, described below.
The most widely held theory was proposed by Johan Hendrik Caspar Kern in 1870, being supported by, amongst others, William Stubbs and Marc Bloch. Kern derived the word from a putative Frankish term "*fehu-ôd", in which "*fehu" means "cattle" and "-ôd" means "goods", implying "a moveable object of value". Bloch explains that by the beginning of the 10th century it was common to value land in monetary terms but to pay for it with moveable objects of equivalent value, such as arms, clothing, horses or food. This was known as "feos", a term that took on the general meaning of paying for something in lieu of money. This meaning was then applied to land itself, in which land was used to pay for fealty, such as to a vassal. Thus the old word "feos" meaning movable property changed little by little to "feus" meaning the exact opposite: landed property.
Another theory was put forward by Archibald R. Lewis. Lewis said the origin of 'fief' is not "feudum" (or "feodum"), but rather "foderum", the earliest attested use being in Astronomus's "Vita Hludovici" (840). In that text is a passage about Louis the Pious that says "annona militaris quas vulgo foderum vocant", which can be translated as "Louis forbade that military provender (which they popularly call "fodder") be furnished.."
Another theory by Alauddin Samarrai suggests an Arabic origin, from "fuyū" (the plural of "fay", which literally means "the returned", and was used especially for 'land that has been conquered from enemies that did not fight'). Samarrai's theory is that early forms of 'fief' include "feo", "feu", "feuz", "feuum" and others, the plurality of forms strongly suggesting origins from a loanword. The first use of these terms is in Languedoc, one of the least Germanic areas of Europe and bordering Muslim Spain. Further, the earliest use of "feuum" (as a replacement for "beneficium") can be dated to 899, the same year a Muslim base at Fraxinetum (La Garde-Freinet) in Provence was established. It is possible, Samarrai says, that French scribes, writing in Latin, attempted to transliterate the Arabic word "fuyū" (the plural of "fay"), which was being used by the Muslim invaders and occupiers at the time, resulting in a plurality of forms – "feo, feu, feuz, feuum" and others – from which eventually "feudum" derived. Samarrai, however, also advises to handle this theory with care, as Medieval and Early Modern Muslim scribes often used etymologically "fanciful roots" in order to claim the most outlandish things to be of Arabian or Muslim origin.
Feudalism, in its various forms, usually emerged as a result of the decentralization of an empire: especially in the Carolingian Empire in 8th century AD/CE, which lacked the bureaucratic infrastructure necessary to support cavalry without allocating land to these mounted troops. Mounted soldiers began to secure a system of hereditary rule over their allocated land and their power over the territory came to encompass the social, political, judicial, and economic spheres.
These acquired powers significantly diminished unitary power in these empires. Only when the infrastructure existed to maintain unitary power—as with the European monarchies—did feudalism begin to yield to this new power structure and eventually disappear.
The classic François-Louis Ganshof version of feudalism describes a set of reciprocal legal and military obligations which existed among the warrior nobility, revolving around the three key concepts of lords, vassals and fiefs. In broad terms a lord was a noble who held land, a vassal was a person who was granted possession of the land by the lord, and the land was known as a fief. In exchange for the use of the fief and protection by the lord, the vassal would provide some sort of service to the lord. There were many varieties of feudal land tenure, consisting of military and non-military service. The obligations and corresponding rights between lord and vassal concerning the fief form the basis of the feudal relationship.
Before a lord could grant land (a fief) to someone, he had to make that person a vassal. This was done at a formal and symbolic ceremony called a commendation ceremony, which was composed of the two-part act of homage and oath of fealty. During homage, the lord and vassal entered into a contract in which the vassal promised to fight for the lord at his command, whilst the lord agreed to protect the vassal from external forces. "Fealty" comes from the Latin "fidelitas" and denotes the fidelity owed by a vassal to his feudal lord. "Fealty" also refers to an oath that more explicitly reinforces the commitments of the vassal made during homage. Such an oath follows homage.
Once the commendation ceremony was complete, the lord and vassal were in a feudal relationship with agreed obligations to one another. The vassal's principal obligation to the lord was to "aid", or military service. Using whatever equipment the vassal could obtain by virtue of the revenues from the fief, the vassal was responsible to answer calls to military service on behalf of the lord. This security of military help was the primary reason the lord entered into the feudal relationship. In addition, the vassal could have other obligations to his lord, such as attendance at his court, whether manorial, baronial, both termed court baron, or at the king's court.
It could also involve the vassal providing "counsel", so that if the lord faced a major decision he would summon all his vassals and hold a council. At the level of the manor this might be a fairly mundane matter of agricultural policy, but also included sentencing by the lord for criminal offences, including capital punishment in some cases. Concerning the king's feudal court, such deliberation could include the question of declaring war. These are examples; depending on the period of time and location in Europe, feudal customs and practices varied; see examples of feudalism.
In its origin, the feudal grant of land had been seen in terms of a personal bond between lord and vassal, but with time and the transformation of fiefs into hereditary holdings, the nature of the system came to be seen as a form of "politics of land" (an expression used by the historian Marc Bloch). The 11th century in France saw what has been called by historians a "feudal revolution" or "mutation" and a "fragmentation of powers" (Bloch) that was unlike the development of feudalism in England or Italy or Germany in the same period or later: Counties and duchies began to break down into smaller holdings as castellans and lesser seigneurs took control of local lands, and (as comital families had done before them) lesser lords usurped/privatized a wide range of prerogatives and rights of the state, most importantly the highly profitable rights of justice, but also travel dues, market dues, fees for using woodlands, obligations to use the lord's mill, etc. (what Georges Duby called collectively the "seigneurie banale"). Power in this period became more personal.
This "fragmentation of powers" was not, however, systematic throughout France, and in certain counties (such as Flanders, Normandy, Anjou, Toulouse), counts were able to maintain control of their lands into the 12th century or later. Thus, in some regions (like Normandy and Flanders), the vassal/feudal system was an effective tool for ducal and comital control, linking vassals to their lords; but in other regions, the system led to significant confusion, all the more so as vassals could and frequently did pledge themselves to two or more lords. In response to this, the idea of a "liege lord" was developed (where the obligations to one lord are regarded as superior) in the 12th century.
Most of the military aspects of feudalism effectively ended by about 1500. This was partly since the military shifted from armies consisting of the nobility to professional fighters thus reducing the nobility's claim on power, but also because the Black Death reduced the nobility's hold over the lower classes. Vestiges of the feudal system hung on in France until the French Revolution of the 1790s, and the system lingered on in parts of Central and Eastern Europe as late as the 1850s. Slavery in Romania was abolished in 1856. Russia finally abolished serfdom in 1861.
Even when the original feudal relationships had disappeared, there were many institutional remnants of feudalism left in place. Historian Georges Lefebvre explains how at an early stage of the French Revolution, on just one night of August 4, 1789, France abolished the long-lasting remnants of the feudal order. It announced, "The National Assembly abolishes the feudal system entirely." Lefebvre explains:
Originally the peasants were supposed to pay for the release of seigneurial dues; these dues affected more than a quarter of the farmland in France and provided most of the income of the large landowners. The majority refused to pay and in 1793 the obligation was cancelled. Thus the peasants got their land free, and also no longer paid the tithe to the church.
The phrase "feudal society" as defined by Marc Bloch offers a wider definition than Ganshof's and includes within the feudal structure not only the warrior aristocracy bound by vassalage, but also the peasantry bound by manorialism, and the estates of the Church. Thus the feudal order embraces society from top to bottom, though the "powerful and well-differentiated social group of the urban classes" came to occupy a distinct position to some extent outside the classic feudal hierarchy.
The idea of "feudalism" was unknown and the system it describes was not conceived of as a formal political system by the people living in the Medieval Period. This section describes the history of the idea of feudalism, how the concept originated among scholars and thinkers, how it changed over time, and modern debates about its use.
The concept of a feudal state or period, in the sense of either a regime or a period dominated by lords who possess financial or social power and prestige, became widely held in the middle of the 18th century, as a result of works such as Montesquieu's "De L'Esprit des Lois" (1748; published in English as "The Spirit of the Laws"), and Henri de Boulainvilliers’s "Histoire des anciens Parlements de France" (1737; published in English as "An Historical Account of the Ancient Parliaments of France or States-General of the Kingdom", 1739). In the 18th century, writers of the Enlightenment wrote about feudalism to denigrate the antiquated system of the "Ancien Régime", or French monarchy. This was the Age of Enlightenment when writers valued reason and the Middle Ages were viewed as the "Dark Ages". Enlightenment authors generally mocked and ridiculed anything from the "Dark Ages" including feudalism, projecting its negative characteristics on the current French monarchy as a means of political gain. For them "feudalism" meant seigneurial privileges and prerogatives. When the French Constituent Assembly abolished the "feudal regime" in August 1789 this is what was meant.
Adam Smith used the term "feudal system" to describe a social and economic system defined by inherited social ranks, each of which possessed inherent social and economic privileges and obligations. In such a system wealth derived from agriculture, which was arranged not according to market forces but on the basis of customary labour services owed by serfs to landowning nobles.
Karl Marx also used the term in the 19th century in his analysis of society's economic and political development, describing feudalism (or more usually feudal society or the feudal mode of production) as the order coming before capitalism. For Marx, what defined feudalism was the power of the ruling class (the aristocracy) in their control of arable land, leading to a class society based upon the exploitation of the peasants who farm these lands, typically under serfdom and principally by means of labour, produce and money rents. Marx thus defined feudalism primarily by its economic characteristics.
He also took it as a paradigm for understanding the power-relationships between capitalists and wage-labourers in his own time: "in pre-capitalist systems it was obvious that most people did not control their own destiny—under feudalism, for instance, serfs had to work for their lords. Capitalism seems different because people are in theory free to work for themselves or for others as they choose. Yet most workers have as little control over their lives as feudal serfs." Some later Marxist theorists (e.g. Eric Wolf) have applied this label to include non-European societies, grouping feudalism together with Imperial Chinese and pre-Columbian Incan societies as 'tributary'.
In the late 19th and early 20th centuries, John Horace Round and Frederic William Maitland, both historians of medieval Britain, arrived at different conclusions as to the character of English society before the Norman Conquest in 1066. Round argued that the Normans had brought feudalism with them to England, while Maitland contended that its fundamentals were already in place in Britain before 1066. The debate continues today, but a consensus viewpoint is that England before the Conquest had commendation (which embodied some of the personal elements in feudalism) while William the Conqueror introduced a modified and stricter northern French feudalism to England incorporating (1086) oaths of loyalty to the king by all who held by feudal tenure, even the vassals of his principal vassals (holding by feudal tenure meant that vassals must provide the quota of knights required by the king or a money payment in substitution).
In the 20th century, two outstanding historians offered still more widely differing perspectives. The French historian Marc Bloch, arguably the most influential 20th-century medieval historian, approached feudalism not so much from a legal and military point of view but from a sociological one, presenting in "Feudal Society" (1939; English 1961) a feudal order not limited solely to the nobility. It is his radical notion that peasants were part of the feudal relationship that sets Bloch apart from his peers: while the vassal performed military service in exchange for the fief, the peasant performed physical labour in return for protection – both are a form of feudal relationship. According to Bloch, other elements of society can be seen in feudal terms; all the aspects of life were centered on "lordship", and so we can speak usefully of a feudal church structure, a feudal courtly (and anti-courtly) literature, and a feudal economy.
In contradistinction to Bloch, the Belgian historian François-Louis Ganshof defined feudalism from a narrow legal and military perspective, arguing that feudal relationships existed only within the medieval nobility itself. Ganshof articulated this concept in "Qu'est-ce que la féodalité?" ("What is feudalism?", 1944; translated in English as "Feudalism"). His classic definition of feudalism is widely accepted today among medieval scholars, though questioned both by those who view the concept in wider terms and by those who find insufficient uniformity in noble exchanges to support such a model.
Although he was never formally a student in the circle of scholars around Marc Bloch and Lucien Febvre that came to be known as the Annales School, Georges Duby was an exponent of the "Annaliste" tradition. In a published version of his 1952 doctoral thesis entitled "La société aux XIe et XIIe siècles dans la région mâconnaise" ("Society in the 11th and 12th centuries in the Mâconnais region"), and working from the extensive documentary sources surviving from the Burgundian monastery of Cluny, as well as the dioceses of Mâcon and Dijon, Duby excavated the complex social and economic relationships among the individuals and institutions of the Mâconnais region and charted a profound shift in the social structures of medieval society around the year 1000. He argued that in early 11th century, governing institutions—particularly comital courts established under the Carolingian monarchy—that had represented public justice and order in Burgundy during the 9th and 10th centuries receded and gave way to a new feudal order wherein independent aristocratic knights wielded power over peasant communities through strong-arm tactics and threats of violence.
In 1939 the Austrian historian subordinated the feudal state as secondary to his concept of a persons association state (""), understanding it in contrast to the territorial state. This form of statehood, identified with the Holy Roman Empire, is described as the most complete form of medieval rule, completing conventional feudal structure of lordship and vassalage with the personal association between the nobility.  But the applicability of this concept to cases outside of the Holy Roman Empire has been questioned, as by Susan Reynolds. The concept has also been questioned and superseded in German histography because of its bias and reductionism towards legitimating the Führerprinzip.
In 1974, the American historian Elizabeth A. R. Brown rejected the label "feudalism" as an anachronism that imparts a false sense of uniformity to the concept. Having noted the current use of many, often contradictory, definitions of "feudalism", she argued that the word is only a construct with no basis in medieval reality, an invention of modern historians read back "tyrannically" into the historical record. Supporters of Brown have suggested that the term should be expunged from history textbooks and lectures on medieval history entirely. In "Fiefs and Vassals: The Medieval Evidence Reinterpreted" (1994), Susan Reynolds expanded upon Brown's original thesis. Although some contemporaries questioned Reynolds's methodology, other historians have supported it and her argument. Reynolds argues:
Too many models of feudalism used for comparisons, even by Marxists, are still either constructed on the 16th-century basis or incorporate what, in a Marxist view, must surely be superficial or irrelevant features from it. Even when one restricts oneself to Europe and to feudalism in its narrow sense it is extremely doubtful whether feudo-vassalic institutions formed a coherent bundle of institutions or concepts that were structurally separate from other institutions and concepts of the time.
The term "feudal" has also been applied to non-Western societies in which institutions and attitudes similar to those of medieval Europe are perceived to have prevailed (See Examples of feudalism). Japan has been extensively studied in this regard. Friday notes that in the 21st century historians of Japan rarely invoke feudalism; instead of looking at similarities, specialists attempting comparative analysis concentrate on fundamental differences. Ultimately, critics say, the many ways the term "feudalism" has been used have deprived it of specific meaning, leading some historians and political theorists to reject it as a useful concept for understanding society.
Richard Abels notes that "Western Civilization and World Civilization textbooks now shy away from the term 'feudalism'."
Military:
Non-European:

</doc>
<doc id="11299" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11299" title="Fox">
Fox

Foxes are small to medium-sized, omnivorous mammals belonging to several genera of the family Canidae. Foxes have a flattened skull, upright triangular ears, a pointed, slightly upturned snout, and a long bushy tail (or "brush").
Twelve species belong to the monophyletic "true foxes" group of genus "Vulpes". Approximately another 25 current or extinct species are always or sometimes called foxes; these foxes are either part of the paraphyletic group of the South American foxes, or of the outlying group, which consists of the bat-eared fox, gray fox, and island fox. Foxes live on every continent except Antarctica. By far the most common and widespread species of fox is the red fox ("Vulpes vulpes") with about 47 recognized subspecies. The global distribution of foxes, together with their widespread reputation for cunning, has contributed to their prominence in popular culture and folklore in many societies around the world. The hunting of foxes with packs of hounds, long an established pursuit in Europe, especially in the British Isles, was exported by European settlers to various parts of the New World.
The word "fox" comes from Old English, which derived from Proto-Germanic *"fuhsaz". This in turn derives from Proto-Indo-European *"puḱ-", meaning ’thick-haired; tail’. Male foxes are known as dogs, tods or reynards, females as vixens, and young as cubs, pups, or kits, though the latter name is not to be confused with a distinct species called kit foxes. Vixen is one of very few words in modern English that retains the Middle English southern dialect "v" pronunciation instead of "f" (i.e. northern English "fox" versus southern English "vox"). A group of foxes is referred to as a skulk, leash, or earth.
Within the Canidae, the results of DNA analysis shows several phylogenetic divisions:
Foxes are generally smaller than some other members of the family Canidae such as wolves and jackals, while they may be larger than some within the family, such as Raccoon dogs. In the largest species, the red fox, males weigh on average between , while the smallest species, the fennec fox, weighs just . Foxy features typically include a triangular face, pointed ears, an elongated rostrum, and a bushy tail. Foxes are digitigrade; they walk on their toes. Unlike most members of the family Canidae, foxes have partially retractable claws. Fox vibrissae, or whiskers, are black. The whiskers on the muzzle, mystaciae vibrissae, average long, while the whiskers everywhere else on the head average to be shorter in length. Whiskers (carpal vibrissae) are also on the forelimbs and average long, pointing downward and backward. Other physical characteristics vary according to habitat and adaptive significance.
Fox species differ in fur color, length, and density. Coat colors range from pearly white to black-and-white to black flecked with white or grey on the underside. Fennec foxes (and other species of fox adapted to life in the desert, such as kit foxes), for example, have large ears and short fur to aid in keeping the body cool. Arctic foxes, on the other hand, have tiny ears and short limbs as well as thick, insulating fur, which aid in keeping the body warm. Red foxes, by contrast, have a typical auburn pelt, the tail normally ending with a white marking. A fox's coat color and texture may vary due to the change in seasons; fox pelts are richer and denser in the colder months and lighter in the warmer months. To get rid of the dense winter coat, foxes moult once a year around April; the process begins from the feet, up the legs, and then along the back. Coat color may also change as the individual ages.
A fox's dentition, like all other canids, is I 3/3, C 1/1, PM 4/4, M 3/2 = 42. (Bat-eared foxes have six extra molars, totalling in 48 teeth.) Foxes have pronounced carnassial pairs, which is characteristic of a carnivore. These pairs consist of the upper premolar and the lower first molar, and work together to shear tough material like flesh. Foxes' canines are pronounced, also characteristic of a carnivore, and are excellent in gripping prey.
In the wild, the typical lifespan of a fox is one to three years, although individuals may live up to ten years. Unlike many canids, foxes are not always pack animals. Typically, they live in small family groups, but some (such as Arctic foxes) are known to be solitary.
Foxes are omnivores. Their diet is made up primarily of invertebrates such as insects and small vertebrates such as reptiles and birds. They may also eat eggs and vegetation. Many species are generalist predators, but some (such as the crab-eating fox) have more specialized diets. Most species of fox consume around of food every day. Foxes cache excess food, burying it for later consumption, usually under leaves, snow, or soil. While hunting, foxes tend to use a particular pouncing technique, such that they crouch down to camouflage themselves in the terrain and then use their hind legs to leap up with great force and land on top of their chosen prey. Using their pronounced canine teeth, they can then grip the prey's neck and shake it until it is dead or can be readily disemboweled.
The gray fox is one of only two canine species known to regularly climb trees; the other is the raccoon dog.
The male fox's scrotum is held up close to the body with the testes inside even after they descend. Like other canines, the male fox has a baculum, or penile bone. The testes of red foxes are smaller than those of Arctic foxes. Sperm formation in red foxes begins in August–September, with the testicles attaining their greatest weight in December–February.
Vixens are in heat for one to six days, making their reproductive cycle twelve months long. As with other canines, the ova are shed during estrus without the need for the stimulation of copulating. Once the egg is fertilized, the vixen enters a period of gestation that can last from 52 to 53 days. Foxes tend to have an average litter size of four to five with an 80 percent success rate in becoming pregnant. Litter sizes can vary greatly according to species and environmentthe Arctic fox, for example, can have up to eleven kits.
The vixen usually has six or eight mammae. Each teat has 8 to 20 lactiferous ducts, which connect the mammary gland to the nipple, allowing for milk to be carried to the nipple.
The fox's vocal repertoire is vast:
In the case of domesticated foxes, the whining seems to remain in adult individuals as a sign of excitement and submission in the presence of their owners.
Canids commonly known as foxes include the following genera and species:
Several fox species are endangered in their native environments. Pressures placed on foxes include habitat loss and being hunted for pelts, other trade, or control. Due in part to their opportunistic hunting style and industriousness, foxes are commonly resented as nuisance animals. On the other hand, foxes, while often considered pests themselves, have been successfully employed to control pests on fruit farms while leaving the fruit intact.
The island fox, though considered a near-threatened species throughout the world, is becoming increasingly endangered in its endemic environment of the California Channel Islands. A population on an island is smaller than those on the mainland because of limited resources like space, food and shelter. Island populations, therefore, are highly susceptible to external threats ranging from introduced predatory species and humans to extreme weather. On the California Channel Islands, it was found that the population of the island fox was so low due to an outbreak of canine distemper virus from 1999 to 2000 as well as predation by non-native golden eagles. Since 1993, the eagles have caused the population to decline by as much as 95%. Because of the low number of foxes, the population went through an Allee effect; this is where at low enough densities, an individual's fitness decreases. Conservationists, therefore, had to take healthy breeding pairs out of the wild population to breed them in captivity until they had enough foxes to release back into the wild. Nonnative grazers were also removed so that native plants would be able to grow back to their natural height, thereby providing adequate cover and protection for the foxes against golden eagles.
Darwin's fox is considered critically endangered because of their small known population of 250 mature individuals as well as their restricted distribution. On the Chilean mainland, the population is limited to Nahuelbuta National Park and the surrounding Valdivian rainforest. Similarly on Chiloé Island, their population is limited to the forests that extend from the southernmost to the northwestern most part of the island. Though the Nahuelbuta National Park is protected, 90% of the species live on Chiloé Island. A major problem the species faces, therefore, is their dwindling, limited habitat due to the cutting and burning of the unprotected forests. Because of deforestation, the Darwin's fox habitat is shrinking, allowing for their competitor's (chilla fox) preferred habitat of open space, to increase; the Darwin's fox, subsequently, is being outcompeted. Another problem they face is their inability to fight off diseases transmitted by the increasing number of pet dogs. To conserve these animals, researchers suggest the need for the forests that link the Nahuelbuta National Park to the coast of Chile and in turn Chiloé Island and its forests, to be protected. They also suggest that other forests around Chile be examined to determine whether Darwin's foxes have previously existed there or can live there in the future, should the need to reintroduce the species to those areas arise. And finally, the researchers advise for the creation of a captive breeding program, in Chile, because of the limited number of mature individuals in the wild.
Foxes are often considered pests or nuisance creatures for their opportunistic attacks on poultry and other small livestock. Fox attacks on humans are not common.
Many foxes adapt well to human environments, with several species classified as "resident urban carnivores" for their ability to sustain populations entirely within urban boundaries. Foxes in urban areas can live longer and can have smaller litter sizes than foxes in non-urban areas. Urban foxes are ubiquitous in Europe, where they show altered behaviors compared to non-urban foxes, including increased population density, smaller territory, and pack foraging. Foxes have been introduced in numerous locations, with varying effects on indigenous flora and fauna.
In some countries, foxes are major predators of rabbits and hens. Population oscillations of these two species were the first nonlinear oscillation studied, and led to the derivation of the Lotka–Volterra equation.
Fox hunting originated in the United Kingdom in the 16th century. Hunting with dogs is now banned in the United Kingdom, though hunting without dogs is still permitted. Red foxes were introduced into Australia in the early 19th century for sport, and have since become widespread through much of the country. They have caused population decline among many native species and prey on livestock, especially new lambs. Fox hunting is practiced as recreation in several other countries including Canada, France, Ireland, Italy, Russia, United States and Australia.
There are many records of domesticated red foxes and others, but rarely of sustained domestication. A recent and notable exception is the Russian silver fox, which resulted in visible and behavioral changes, and is a case study of an animal population modeling according to human domestication needs. The current group of domesticated silver foxes are the result of nearly fifty years of experiments in the Soviet Union and Russia to domesticate the silver morph of the red fox. This selective breeding resulted in physical and behavioral traits appearing that are frequently seen in domestic cats, dogs, and other animals, such as pigmentation changes, floppy ears, and curly tails. Notably, the new foxes became more tame, allowing themselves to be petted, whimpering to get attention and sniffing and licking their caretakers.
In the United Kingdom, a number of cases of non-fatal attacks on humans have been reported. They often involved children, or if there were gaps in homes through which foxes could pass.
Foxes are among the comparatively few mammals which have been able to adapt themselves to a certain degree to living in urban (mostly suburban) human environments. Their omnivorous diet allows them to survive on discarded food waste, and their skittish and often nocturnal nature means that they are often able to avoid detection, despite their larger size. Urban foxes, however, have been identified as threats to cats and small dogs, and for this reason there is often pressure to exclude them from these environments.
The San Joaquin kit fox is a highly endangered species that has, ironically, become adapted to urban living in the San Joaquin Valley and Salinas Valley of southern California. Its diet includes mice, ground squirrels, rabbits, hares, bird eggs, and insects, and it has claimed habitats in open areas, golf courses, drainage basins, and school grounds.
The fox appears in many cultures, usually in folklore. However, there are slight variations in their depictions in folklore. In Western folklore and also in Persian folklore, foxes are depicted as a symbol of cunning and trickery – a reputation derived especially from their reputed ability to evade hunters. This is usually represented as a character possessing these traits. These traits are used on a wide variety of characters, either making them a nuisance to the story, a misunderstood hero, or a devious villain.
In Asian folklore, foxes are depicted as a familiar spirit possessed of magic powers. Similar to Western folklore, foxes are depicted as mischievous, usually tricking other people, with the ability to disguise as an attractive female human. However, there are other depictions of foxes as a mystical, sacred creature, that can either bring wonder or ruin. Nine-tailed foxes appear in Chinese folklore, literature, and mythology, in which, depending on the tale can be a good or a bad omen. The motif was eventually introduced from Chinese to Japanese and Korean cultures.
The constellation Vulpecula represents a fox.

</doc>
<doc id="11300" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11300" title="Foundationalism">
Foundationalism

Foundationalism concerns philosophical theories of knowledge resting upon justified belief, or some secure foundation of certainty such as a conclusion inferred from a basis of sound premises. The main rival of the foundationalist theory of justification is the coherence theory of justification, whereby a body of knowledge, not requiring a secure foundation, can be established by the interlocking strength of its components, like a puzzle solved without prior certainty that each small region was solved correctly.
Identifying the alternatives as either circular reasoning or infinite regress, and thus exhibiting the regress problem, Aristotle made foundationalism his own clear choice, positing basic beliefs underpinning others. Descartes, the most famed foundationalist, discovered a foundation in the fact of his own existence and in the "clear and distinct" ideas of reason, whereas Locke found a foundation in experience. Differing foundations may reflect differing epistemological emphases—empiricists emphasizing "experience", rationalists emphasizing "reason"—but may blend both.
In the 1930s, debate over foundationalism revived. Whereas Moritz Schlick viewed scientific knowledge like a pyramid where a special class of statements does not require verification through other beliefs and serves as a foundation, Otto Neurath argued that scientific knowledge lacks an ultimate foundation and acts like a raft. In the 1950s, foundationalism fell into decline – largely due to the influence of Willard Van Orman Quine, whose ontological relativity found any belief networked to one's beliefs on all of reality, while auxiliary beliefs somewhere in the vast network are readily modified to protect desired beliefs.
Classically, foundationalism had posited infallibility of basic beliefs and deductive reasoning between beliefs—a strong foundationalism. Around 1975, weak foundationalism emerged. Thus recent foundationalists have variously allowed fallible basic beliefs, and inductive reasoning between them, either by enumerative induction or by inference to the best explanation. And whereas internalists require cognitive access to justificatory means, externalists find justification without such access.
Foundationalism was initiated by French early modern philosopher René Descartes. In his "Meditations", Descartes challenged the contemporary principles of philosophy by arguing that everything he knew he learnt from or through his senses. He used various arguments to challenge the reliability of the senses, citing previous errors and the possibilities that he was dreaming or being deceived by an Evil Demon. Descartes attempted to establish the secure foundations for knowledge to avoid scepticism. He contrasted the information provided by senses, which is unclear and uncertain, with the truths of geometry, which are clear and distinct. Geometrical truths are also certain and indubitable; Descartes thus attempted to find truths which were clear and distinct because they would be indubitably true and a suitable foundation for knowledge. His method was to question all of his beliefs until he reached something clear and distinct that was indubitably true. The result was his "cogito ergo sum" – 'I think therefore I am', or the belief that he was thinking – as his indubitable belief suitable as a foundation for knowledge. This resolved Descartes' problem of the Evil Demon – the possibility that he was being deceived by an Evil Demon, rendering all of his beliefs about the external world false. Even if his beliefs about the external world were false, his beliefs about what he was experiencing were still indubitably true, even if those perceptions do not relate to anything in the world.
Several other philosophers of the early modern period, including John Locke, G. W. Leibniz, George Berkeley, David Hume, and Thomas Reid, all accepted foundationalism as well. Baruch Spinoza was interpreted as metaphysical foundationalist by G. W. F. Hegel, a proponent of coherentism. Immanuel Kant's foundationalism rests on his theory of categories.
In late modern philosophy, foundationalism was defended by J. G. Fichte in his book "Grundlage der gesamten Wissenschaftslehre" (1794/1795), Wilhelm Windelband in his book "Über die Gewißheit der Erkenntniss." (1873), and Gottlob Frege in his book "Die Grundlagen der Arithmetik" (1884).
In contemporary philosophy, foundationalism has been defended by Edmund Husserl, Bertrand Russell and John McDowell.
Foundationalism is an attempt to respond to the regress problem of justification in epistemology. According to this argument, every proposition requires justification to support it, but any justification also needs to be justified itself. If this goes on "ad infinitum", it is not clear how anything in the chain could be justified. Foundationalism holds that there are 'basic beliefs' which serve as foundations to anchor the rest of our beliefs. Strong versions of the theory assert that an indirectly justified belief is completely justified by basic beliefs; more moderate theories hold that indirectly justified beliefs require basic beliefs to be justified, but can be further justified by other factors.
During thousands of years, Western philosophy pursued a solid foundation as the ultimate and eternal reference system of knowledge called foundationalism. It has existed since ancient Greece, the focus of this theory is that all knowledge or cognitive awareness of the subject (human being) are based on a solid foundation. This foundation serves not only as the starting point merely as a basis for knowledge of the truth of existence. Thinking is the process of proving the validity of knowledge, not proving the rationality of the foundation from which knowledge is shaped. This means, with ultimate cause, the foundation is true, absolute, entire and impossible to prove. Neopragmatist philosopher Richard Rorty, a proponent of anti-foundationalism, said that the fundamentalism confirmed the existence of the "privileged representation" which constitutes the foundation, from which dominates epistemology. Plato's theory of Forms is the earliest foundationalism. So from the point of view of Plato, the Forms shows the general concept which plays as a model for the release of existence, which is only the faint copy of the Forms of eternity, that means, understanding the expression of objects leads to acquiring all knowledge, then acquiring knowledge accompanies achieving the truth. Achieving the truth means understanding the foundation. This idea still has some appeal in for example international relations studies.
Foundationalism holds basic beliefs exist, which are justified without reference to other beliefs, and that nonbasic beliefs must ultimately be justified by basic beliefs. Classical foundationalism maintains that basic beliefs must be infallible if they are to justify nonbasic beliefs, and that only deductive reasoning can be used to transfer justification from one belief to another. Laurence BonJour has argued that the classical formulation of foundationalism requires basic beliefs to be infallible, incorrigible, indubitable, and certain if they are to be adequately justified. Mental states and immediate experience are often taken as good candidates for basic beliefs because it is argued that beliefs about these do not need further support to be justified.
As an alternative to the classic view, modest foundationalism does not require that basic perceptual beliefs are infallible, but holds that it is reasonable to assume that perceptual beliefs are justified unless evidence to the contrary exists. This is still foundationalism because it maintains that all non-basic beliefs must be ultimately justified by basic beliefs, but it does not require that basic beliefs are infallible and allows inductive reasoning as an acceptable form of inference. For example, a belief that 'I see red' could be defeated with psychological evidence showing my mind to be confused or inattentive. Modest foundationalism can also be used to avoid the problem of inference. Even if perceptual beliefs are infallible, it is not clear that they can infallibly ground empirical knowledge (even if my belief that the table looks red to me is infallible, the inference to the belief that the table actually is red might not be infallible). Modest foundationalism does not require this link between perception and reality to be so strong; our perception of a table being yellow is adequate justification to believe that this is the case, even if it is not infallible.
Reformed epistemology is a form of modest foundationalism which takes religious beliefs as basic because they are non-inferentially justified: their justification arises from religious experience, rather than prior beliefs. This takes a modest approach to foundationalism – religious beliefs are not taken to be infallible, but are assumed to be "prima facie" justified unless evidence arises to the contrary.
Foundationalism can take internalist and externalist forms. Internalism requires that a believer's justification for a belief must be accessible to them for it to be justified. Foundationalist internalists have held that basic beliefs are justified by mental events or states, such as experiences, that do not constitute beliefs. Alternatively, basic beliefs may be justified by some special property of the belief itself, such as its being self-evident or infallible. Externalism maintains that it is unnecessary for the means of justification of a belief to be accessible to the believer.
Reliabilism is an externalist foundationalist theory, initially proposed by Alvin Goldman, which argues that a belief is justified if it is reliably produced, meaning that it will be probably true. Goldman distinguished between two kinds of justification for beliefs: belief-dependent and belief-independent. A belief-dependent process uses prior beliefs to produce new beliefs; a belief-independent process does not, using other stimuli instead. Beliefs produced this way are justified because the processes that cause them are reliable; this might be because we have evolved to reach good conclusions when presented with sense-data, meaning the conclusions we draw from our senses are usually true.
Critics of foundationalism often argue that for a belief to be justified it must be supported by other beliefs; in Donald Davidson's phrase, "only a belief can be a reason for another belief". For instance, Wilfrid Sellars argued that non-doxastic mental states cannot be reasons, and so noninferential warrant cannot be derived from them. Similarly, critics of externalist foundationalism argue that only mental states or properties the believer is aware of could make a belief justified.
According to skepticism, there are no beliefs that are so obviously certain that they require support from no other beliefs. Even if one does not accept this very strong claim, foundationalists have a problem with giving an uncontroversial or principled account of which beliefs are self-evident or indubitable.
Postmodernists and post-structuralists such as Richard Rorty and Jacques Derrida have attacked foundationalism on the grounds that the truth of a statement or discourse is only verifiable in accordance with other statements and discourses. Rorty in particular elaborates further on this, claiming that the individual, the community, the human body as a whole have a 'means by which they know the world' (this entails language, culture, semiotic systems, mathematics, science etc.). In order to verify particular means, or particular statements belonging to certain means (e.g., the propositions of the natural sciences), a person would have to 'step outside' the means and critique them neutrally, in order to provide a foundation for adopting them. However, this is impossible. The only way in which one can know the world is through the means by which they know the world; a method cannot justify itself. This argument can be seen as directly related to Wittgenstein's theory of language, drawing a parallel between postmodernism and late logical positivism that is united in critique of foundationalism.

</doc>
<doc id="11302" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11302" title="Felidae">
Felidae

Felidae is a family of mammals in the order Carnivora, colloquially referred to as cats, and constitutes a clade. A member of this family is also called a felid. The term "cat" refers both to felids in general and specifically to the domestic cat ("Felis catus").
Felidae species exhibit the most diverse fur pattern of all terrestrial carnivores. Cats have retractile claws, slender muscular bodies and strong flexible forelimbs. Their teeth and facial muscles allow for a powerful bite. They are all obligate carnivores, and most are solitary predators ambushing or stalking their prey. Wild cats occur in Africa, Europe, Asia and the Americas. Some wild cat species are adapted to forest habitats, some to arid environments, and a few also to wetlands and mountainous terrain. Their activity patterns range from nocturnal and crepuscular to diurnal, depending on their preferred prey species.
Reginald Innes Pocock divided the extant Felidae into three subfamilies: the Pantherinae, the Felinae and the Acinonychinae, differing from each other by the ossification of the hyoid apparatus and by the cutaneous sheaths which protect their claws.
This concept has been revised following developments in molecular biology and techniques for analysis of morphological data. Today, the living Felidae are divided in two subfamilies: the Pantherinae and Felinae, with the Acinonychinae subsumed into the latter. Pantherinae includes five "Panthera" and two "Neofelis" species, while Felinae includes the other 34 species in ten genera.
The first cats emerged during the Oligocene about , with the appearance of "Proailurus" and "Pseudaelurus". The latter species complex was ancestral to two main lines of felids: the cats in the extant subfamilies and a group of extinct cats of the subfamily Machairodontinae, which include the saber-toothed cats such as the "Smilodon". The "false sabre-toothed cats", the Barbourofelidae and Nimravidae, are not true cats, but are closely related. Together with the Felidae, Viverridae, hyaenas and mongooses, they constitute the Feliformia.
All members of the cat family have the following characteristics in common:
The colour, length and density of their fur is very diverse. Fur colour covers the gamut from white to black, and fur pattern from distinctive small spots, stripes to small blotches and rosettes. Most cat species are born with a spotted fur, except the jaguarundi ("Herpailurus yagouaroundi"), Asian golden cat ("Catopuma temminckii") and caracal ("Caracal caracal"). The spotted fur of lion ("Panthera leo") and cougar ("Puma concolor") cubs change to a uniform fur during their ontogeny. Those living in cold environments have thick fur with long hair, like the snow leopard ("Panthera uncia") and the Pallas's cat ("Otocolobus manul"). Those living in tropical and hot climate zones have short fur. Several species exhibit melanism with all-black individuals.
In the great majority of cat species, the tail is between a third and a half of the body length, although with some exceptions, like the "Lynx" species and margay. Cat species vary greatly in body and skull sizes, and weights:
Most cat species have a haploid number of 18 or 19. Central and South American cats have a haploid number of 18, possibly due to the combination of two smaller chromosomes into a larger one.
The family Felidae is part of the Feliformia, a suborder that diverged probably about into several families. The Felidae and the Asiatic linsangs are considered a sister group, which split about .
The earliest cats probably appeared about . "Proailurus" is the oldest known cat that occurred after the Eocene–Oligocene extinction event about ; fossil remains were excavated in France and Mongolia's Hsanda Gol Formation. Fossil occurrences indicate that the Felidae arrived in North America earliest . This is about later than the Ursidae and the Nimravidae, and about 10 million years later than the Canidae.
In the Early Miocene about , "Pseudaelurus" lived in Africa. Its fossil jaws were also excavated in geological formations of Europe's Vallesian, Asia's Middle Miocene and North America's late Hemingfordian to late Barstovian epochs.
In the Early or Middle Miocene, the sabre-toothed Machairodontinae evolved in Africa and migrated northwards in the Late Miocene. With their large upper canines, they were adapted to prey on large-bodied megaherbivores. "Miomachairodus" is the oldest known member of this subfamily. "Metailurus" lived in Africa and Eurasia about . Several "Paramachaerodus" skeletons were found in Spain. "Homotherium" appeared in Africa, Eurasia and North America around , and "Megantereon" about . "Smilodon" lived in North and South America from about . This subfamily became extinct in the Late Pleistocene.
Results of mitochondrial analysis indicate that the living Felidae species descended from a common ancestor, which originated in Asia in the Late Miocene epoch. They migrated to Africa, Europe and the Americas in the course of at least 10 migration waves during the past ~11 million years. Low sea levels, interglacial and glacial periods facilitated these migrations. "Panthera blytheae" is the oldest known pantherine cat dated to the late Messinian to early Zanclean ages about . A fossil skull was excavated in 2010 in Zanda County on the Tibetan Plateau. "Panthera palaeosinensis" from North China probably dates to the Late Miocene or Early Pliocene. The skull of the holotype is similar to that of a lion or leopard. "Panthera zdanskyi" dates to the Gelasian about . Several fossil skulls and jawbones were excavated in northwestern China. "Panthera gombaszoegensis" is the earliest known pantherine cat that lived in Europe about .
Living felids fall into eight evolutionary lineages or species clades. Genotyping of nuclear DNA of all 41 felid species revealed that hybridization between species occurred in the course of evolution within the majority of the eight lineages.
Modelling of felid coat pattern transformations revealed that nearly all patterns evolved from small spots.
Traditionally, five subfamilies have been distinguished within the Felidae based on phenotypical features: the Pantherinae, the Felinae, the Acinonychinae, and the extinct Machairodontinae and Proailurinae.
The following table shows the living genera within the Felidae, grouped according to the traditional phenotypical classification. Estimated genetic divergence times of the corresponding eight genotypical evolutionary lineages are indicated in million years ago (Mya), based on analysis of autosomal, xDNA, yDNA and mtDNA gene segments; and estimates based on analysis of biparental nuclear genomes.
The phylogenetic relationships of living felids are shown in the following cladogram:

</doc>
<doc id="11303" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11303" title="Folklore">
Folklore

Folklore is the expressive body of culture shared by a particular group of people; it encompasses the traditions common to that culture, subculture or group. These include oral traditions such as tales, proverbs and jokes. They include material culture, ranging from traditional building styles to handmade toys common to the group. Folklore also includes customary lore, the forms and rituals of celebrations such as Christmas and weddings, folk dances and initiation rites. Each one of these, either singly or in combination, is considered a folklore artifact. Just as essential as the form, folklore also encompasses the transmission of these artifacts from one region to another or from one generation to the next. Folklore is not something one can typically gain in a formal school curriculum or study in the fine arts. Instead, these traditions are passed along informally from one individual to another either through verbal instruction or demonstration. The academic study of folklore is called folklore studies or folkloristics, and it can be explored at undergraduate, graduate and Ph.D. levels.
The word "folklore", a compound of "folk" and "lore", was coined in 1846 by the Englishman William Thoms, who contrived the term as a replacement for the contemporary terminology of "popular antiquities" or "popular literature". The second half of the word, "lore", comes from Old English lār 'instruction'. It is the knowledge and traditions of a particular group, frequently passed along by word of mouth.
The concept of "folk" has varied over time. When Thoms first created this term, "folk" applied only to rural, frequently poor and illiterate peasants. A more modern definition of "folk" is a social group that includes two or more persons with common traits, who express their shared identity through distinctive traditions. "Folk is a flexible concept which can refer to a nation as in American folklore or to a single family." This expanded social definition of "folk" supports a broader view of the material, i.e. the lore, considered to be "folklore artifacts". These now include all "things people make with words (verbal lore), things they make with their hands (material lore), and things they make with their actions (customary lore)". Folklore is no longer considered to be limited to that which is old or obsolete. The folklorist studies the traditional artifacts of a social group and how they are transmitted. "Transmission" is a vital part of the folklore process; without communicating these beliefs and customs within the group over space and time, they would be relegated to cultural archaeologists. These folk artifacts continue to be passed along informally, as a rule anonymously, and always in multiple variants. The folk group is not individualistic, it is community-based and nurtures its lore in community. "As new groups emerge, new folklore is created… surfers, motorcyclists, ". In direct contrast to high culture, where any single work of a named artist is protected by copyright law, folklore is a function of shared identity within a common social group.
Having identified folk artifacts, the professional folklorist strives to understand the "significance" of these beliefs, customs, and objects for the group, since these cultural units would not be passed along unless they had some continued relevance within the group. That meaning can however shift and morph, for example: the Halloween celebration of the 21st century is not the All Hallows' Eve of the Middle Ages, and even gives rise to its own set of urban legends independent of the historical celebration; the cleansing rituals of Orthodox Judaism were originally good public health in a land with little water, but now these customs signify for some people identification as an Orthodox Jew. By comparison, a common action such as tooth brushing, which is also transmitted within a group, remains a practical hygiene and health issue and does not rise to the level of a group-defining tradition. Tradition is initially remembered behavior; once it loses its practical purpose, there is no reason for further transmission unless it has been imbued with meaning beyond the initial practicality of the action. This meaning is at the core of folkloristics, the study of folklore.
With an increasingly theoretical sophistication of the social sciences, it has become evident that folklore is a naturally occurring and necessary component of any social group; it is indeed all around us. Folklore does not have to be old or antiquated, it continues to be created and transmitted, and in any group it is used to differentiate between "us" and "them".
Folklore began to distinguish itself as an autonomous discipline during the period of romantic nationalism in Europe. A particular figure in this development was Johann Gottfried von Herder, whose writings in the 1770s presented oral traditions as organic processes grounded in locale. After the German states were invaded by Napoleonic France, Herder's approach was adopted by many of his fellow Germans who systematized the recorded folk traditions and used them in their process of nation building. This process was enthusiastically embraced by smaller nations like Finland, Estonia, and Hungary, which were seeking political independence from their dominant neighbours.
Folklore as a field of study further developed among 19th century European scholars who were contrasting tradition with the newly developing modernity. Its focus was the oral folklore of the rural peasant populations, which were considered as residue and survivals of the past that continued to exist within the lower strata of society. The "Kinder- und Hausmärchen" of the Brothers Grimm (first published 1812) is the best known but by no means only collection of verbal folklore of the European peasantry of that time. This interest in stories, sayings and songs continued throughout the 19th century and aligned the fledgling discipline of folkloristics with literature and mythology. By the turn into the 20th century the number and sophistication of folklore studies and folklorists had grown both in Europe and North America. Whereas European folklorists remained focused on the oral folklore of the homogenous peasant populations in their regions, the American folklorists, led by Franz Boas and Ruth Benedict, chose to consider Native American cultures in their research, and included the totality of their customs and beliefs as folklore. This distinction aligned American folkloristics with cultural anthropology and ethnology, using the same techniques of data collection in their field research. This divided alliance of folkloristics between the humanities in Europe and the social sciences in America offers a wealth of theoretical vantage points and research tools to the field of folkloristics as a whole, even as it continues to be a point of discussion within the field itself.
The term "folkloristics", along with the alternative name "folklore studies", became widely used in the 1950s to distinguish the academic study of traditional culture from the folklore artifacts themselves. When the American Folklife Preservation Act (Public Law 94-201) was passed by the U.S. Congress in January 1976, to coincide with the Bicentennial Celebration, folkloristics in the United States came of age.
"…[Folklife] means the traditional expressive culture shared within the various groups in the United States: familial, ethnic, occupational, religious, regional; expressive culture includes a wide range of creative and symbolic forms such as custom, belief, technical skill, language, literature, art, architecture, music, play, dance, drama, ritual, pageantry, handicraft; these expressions are mainly learned orally, by imitation, or in performance, and are generally maintained without benefit of formal instruction or institutional direction." 
Added to the extensive array of other legislation designed to protect the natural and cultural heritage of the United States, this law also marks a shift in national awareness. It gives voice to a growing understanding that cultural diversity is a national strength and a resource worthy of protection. Paradoxically, it is a unifying feature, not something that separates the citizens of a country. "We no longer view cultural difference as a problem to be solved, but as a tremendous opportunity. In the diversity of American folklife we find a marketplace teeming with the exchange of traditional forms and cultural ideas, a rich resource for Americans". This diversity is celebrated annually at the Smithsonian Folklife Festival and many other folklife fests around the country.
The folk of the 19th century, the social group identified in the original term "folklore", was characterized by being rural, illiterate and poor. They were the peasants living in the countryside, in contrast to the urban populace of the cities. Only toward the end of the century did the urban proletariat (on the coattails of Marxist theory) become included with the rural poor as folk. The common feature in this expanded definition of folk was their identification as the underclass of society.
Moving forward into the 20th century, in tandem with new thinking in the , folklorists also revised and expanded their concept of the folk group. By the 1960s it was understood that social groups, i.e. folk groups, were all around us; each individual is enmeshed in a multitude of differing identities and their concomitant social groups. The first group that each of us is born into is the family, and each family has its own unique family folklore. As a child grows into an individual, its identities also increase to include age, language, ethnicity, occupation, etc. Each of these cohorts has its own folklore, and as one folklorist points out, this is "not idle speculation… Decades of fieldwork have demonstrated conclusively that these groups do have their own folklore." In this modern understanding, folklore is a function of shared identity within any social group.
This folklore can include jokes, sayings and expected behavior in multiple variants, always transmitted in an informal manner. For the most part it will be learned by observation, imitation, repetition or correction by other group members. This informal knowledge is used to confirm and re-inforce the identity of the group. It can be used both internally within the group to express their common identity, for example in an initiation ceremony for new members. Or it can be used externally to differentiate the group from outsiders, like a folkdance demonstration at a community festival. Significant to folklorists here is that there are two opposing but equally valid ways to use this in the study of a group: you can start with an identified group in order to explore its folklore, or you can identify folklore items and use them to identify the social group.
Beginning in the 1960s, a further expansion of the concept of folk began to unfold through the study of folklore. Individual researchers identified folk groups that had previously been overlooked and ignored. One notable example of this is found in an issue of the "Journal of American Folklore", published in 1975, which is dedicated exclusively to articles on women's folklore, with approaches that had not come from a man's perspective. Other groups that were highlighted as part of this broadened understanding of the folk group were non-traditional families, occupational groups, and families that pursued the production of folk items over multiple generations.
Individual folklore artifacts are commonly classified as one of three types: material, verbal or customary lore. For the most part self-explanatory, these categories include physical objects (material folklore), common sayings, expressions, stories and songs (verbal folklore), and beliefs and ways of doing things (customary folklore). There is also a fourth major subgenre defined for children's folklore and games (childlore), as the collection and interpretation of this fertile topic is peculiar to school yards and neighborhood streets. Each of these genres and their subtypes is intended to organize and categorize the folklore artifacts; they provide common vocabulary and consistent labeling for folklorists to communicate with each other.
That said, each artifact is unique; in fact one of the characteristics of all folklore artifacts is their variation within genres and types. This is in direct contrast to manufactured goods, where the goal in production is to create identical products and any variations are considered mistakes. It is however just this required variation that makes identification and classification of the defining features a challenge. And while this classification is essential for the subject area of folkloristics, it remains just labeling, and adds little to an understanding of the traditional development and meaning of the artifacts themselves.
Necessary as they are, genre classifications are misleading in their oversimplification of the subject area. Folklore artifacts are never self-contained, they do not stand in isolation but are particulars in the self-representation of a community. Different genres are frequently combined with each other to mark an event. So a birthday celebration might include a song or formulaic way of greeting the birthday child (verbal), presentation of a cake and wrapped presents (material), as well as customs to honor the individual, such as sitting at the head of the table, and blowing out the candles with a wish. There might also be special games played at birthday parties which are not generally played at other times. Adding to the complexity of the interpretation, the birthday party for a seven-year-old will not be identical to the birthday party for that same child as a six-year-old, even though they follow the same model. For each artifact embodies a single variant of a performance in a given time and space. The task of the folklorist becomes to identify within this surfeit of variables the constants and the expressed meaning that shimmer through all variations: honoring of the individual within the circle of family and friends, gifting to express their value and worth to the group, and of course, the festival food and drink as signifiers of the event.
The formal definition of verbal lore is words, both written and oral, that are "spoken, sung, voiced forms of traditional utterance that show repetitive patterns." Crucial here are the repetitive patterns. Verbal lore is not just any conversation, but words and phrases conforming to a traditional configuration recognized by both the speaker and the audience. For narrative types by definition have consistent structure, and follow an existing model in their narrative form. As just one simple example, in English the phrase "An elephant walks into a bar…" instantaneously flags the following text as a joke. It might be one you've already heard, but it might be one that the speaker has just thought up within the current context. Another example is the child's song Old MacDonald Had a Farm, where each performance is distinctive in the animals named, their order and their sounds. Songs such as this are used to express cultural values (farms are important, farmers are old and weather-beaten) and teach children about different domesticated animals.
Verbal folklore was the original folklore, the artifacts defined by William Thoms as older, oral cultural traditions of the rural populace. In his 1846 published call for help in documenting antiquities, Thoms was echoing scholars from across the European continent to collect artifacts of verbal lore. By the beginning of the 20th century these collections had grown to include artifacts from around the world and across several centuries. A system to organize and categorize them became necessary. Antti Aarne published a first classification system for folktales in 1910. This was later expanded into the Aarne–Thompson classification system by Stith Thompson and remains the standard classification system for European folktales and other types of oral literature. As the number of classified oral artifacts grew, similarities were noted in items that had been collected from very different geographic regions, ethnic groups and epochs, giving rise to the Historic–Geographic Method, a methodology that dominated folkloristics in the first half of the 20th century.
When William Thoms first published his appeal to document the verbal lore of the rural populations, it was believed these folk artifacts would die out as the population became literate. Over the past two centuries this belief has proven to be wrong; folklorists continue to collect verbal lore in both written and spoken form from all social groups. Some variants might have been captured in published collections, but much of it is still transmitted orally and indeed continues to be generated in new forms and variants at an alarming rate.
Below is listed a small sampling of types and examples of verbal lore.
The genre of material culture includes all artifacts that can be touched, held, lived in, or eaten. They are tangible objects with a physical presence, either intended for permanent use or to be used at the next meal. Most of these folklore artifacts are single objects that have been created by hand for a specific purpose; however, folk artifacts can also be mass-produced, such as dreidels or Christmas decorations. These items continue to be considered folklore because of their long (pre-industrial) history and their customary use. All of these material objects "existed prior to and continue alongside mechanized industry. … [They are] transmitted across the generations and subject to the same forces of conservative tradition and individual variation" that are found in all folk artifacts. Folklorists are interested in the physical form, the method of manufacture or construction, the pattern of use, as well as the procurement of the raw materials. The meaning to those who both make and use these objects is important. Of primary significance in these studies is the complex balance of continuity over change in both their design and their decoration.
In Europe, prior to the Industrial Revolution, everything was made by hand. While some folklorists of the 19th century wanted to secure the oral traditions of the rural folk before the populace became literate, other folklorists sought to identify hand-crafted objects before their production processes were lost to industrial manufacturing. Just as verbal lore continues to be actively created and transmitted in today's culture, so these handicrafts can still be found all around us, with possibly a shift in purpose and meaning. There are many reasons for continuing to handmake objects for use, for example these skills may be needed to repair manufactured items, or a unique design might be required which is not (or cannot be) found in the stores. Many crafts are considered as simple home maintenance, such as cooking, sewing and carpentry. For many people, handicrafts have also become an enjoyable and satisfying hobby. Handmade objects are often regarded as prestigious, where extra time and thought is spent in their creation and their uniqueness is valued. For the folklorist, these hand-crafted objects embody multifaceted relationships in the lives of the craftsmen and the users, a concept that has been lost with mass-produced items that have no connection to an individual craftsman.
Many traditional crafts, such as ironworking and glass-making, have been elevated to the fine or applied arts and taught in art schools; or they have been repurposed as folk art, characterized as objects whose decorative form supersedes their utilitarian needs. Folk art is found in hex signs on Pennsylvania Dutch barns, tin man sculptures made by metalworkers, front yard Christmas displays, decorated school lockers, carved gun stocks, and tattoos. "Words such as naive, self-taught, and individualistic are used to describe these objects, and the exceptional rather than the representative creation is featured." This is in contrast to the understanding of folklore artifacts that are nurtured and passed along within a community.
Many objects of material folklore are challenging to classify, difficult to archive, and unwieldy to store. The assigned task of museums is to preserve and make use of these bulky artifacts of material culture. To this end, the concept of the living museum has developed, beginning in Scandinavia at the end of the 19th century. These open-air museums not only display the artifacts, but also teach visitors how the items were used, with actors reenacting the everyday lives of people from all segments of society, relying heavily on the material artifacts of a pre-industrial society. Many locations even duplicate the processing of the objects, thus creating new objects of an earlier historic time period. Living museums are now found throughout the world as part of a thriving heritage industry.
This list represents just a small sampling of objects and skills that are included in studies of material culture.
Customary culture is remembered enactment, i.e. re-enactment. It is the patterns of expected behavior within a group, the "traditional and expected way of doing things" A custom can be a single gesture, such as thumbs down or a handshake. It can also be a complex interaction of multiple folk customs and artifacts as seen in a child's birthday party, including verbal lore (Happy Birthday song), material lore (presents and a birthday cake), special games (Musical chairs) and individual customs (making a wish as you blow out the candles). Each of these is a folklore artifact in its own right, potentially worthy of investigation and cultural analysis. Together they combine to build the custom of a birthday party celebration, a scripted combination of multiple artifacts which have meaning within their social group.
Folklorists divide customs into several different categories. A custom can be a seasonal celebration, such as Thanksgiving or New Year's. It can be a life cycle celebration for an individual, such as baptism, birthday or wedding. A custom can also mark a community festival or event; examples of this are Carnival in Cologne or Mardi Gras in New Orleans. This category also includes the Smithsonian Folklife Festival celebrated each summer on the Mall in Washington, DC. A fourth category includes customs related to folk beliefs. Walking under a ladder is just one of many symbols considered unlucky. Occupational groups tend to have a rich history of customs related to their life and work, so the traditions of sailors or lumberjacks. The area of ecclesiastical folklore, which includes modes of worship not sanctioned by the established church tends to be so large and complex that it is usually treated as a specialized area of folk customs; it requires considerable expertise in standard church ritual in order to adequately interpret folk customs and beliefs that originated in official church practice.
Customary folklore is always a performance, be it a single gesture or a complex of scripted customs, and participating in the custom, either as performer or audience, signifies acknowledgment of that social group. Some customary behavior is intended to be performed and understood only within the group itself, so the handkerchief code sometimes used in the gay community or the initiation rituals of the Freemasons. Other customs are designed specifically to represent a social group to outsiders, those who do not belong to this group. The St. Patrick's Day Parade in New York and in other communities across the continent is a single example of an ethnic group parading their separateness (differential behavior), and encouraging Americans of all stripes to show alliance to this colorful ethnic group.
These festivals and parades, with a target audience of people who do not belong to the social group, intersect with the interests and mission of public folklorists, who are engaged in the documentation, preservation, and presentation of traditional forms of folklife. With a swell in popular interest in folk traditions, these community celebrations are becoming more numerous throughout the western world. While ostensibly parading the diversity of their community, economic groups have discovered that these folk parades and festivals are good for business. All shades of people are out on the streets, eating, drinking and spending. This attracts support not only from the business community, but also from federal and state organizations for these local street parties. Paradoxically, in parading diversity within the community, these events have come to authenticate true community, where business interests ally with the varied (folk) social groups to promote the interests of the community as a whole.
This is just a small sampling of types and examples of customary lore.
Childlore is a distinct branch of folklore that deals with activities passed on by children to other children, away from the influence or supervision of an adult. Children's folklore contains artifacts from all the standard folklore genres of verbal, material and customary lore; it is however the child-to-child conduit that distinguishes these artifacts. For childhood is a social group where children teach, learn and share their own traditions, flourishing in a street culture outside the purview of adults. This is also ideally where it needs to be collected; as Iona and Peter Opie demonstrated in their pioneering book "Children's Games in Street and Playground". Here the social group of children is studied on its own terms, not as a derivative of adult social groups. It is shown that the culture of children is quite distinctive; it is generally unnoticed by the sophisticated world of adults, and quite as little affected by it.
Of particular interest to folklorists here is the mode of transmission of these artifacts; this lore circulates exclusively within an informal pre-literate children's network or folkgroup. It does not include artifacts taught to children by adults. However children can take the taught and teach it further to other children, turning it into childlore. Or they can take the artifacts and turn them into something else; so Old McDonald's farm is transformed from animal noises to the scatological version of animal poop. This childlore is characterized by "its lack of dependence on literary and fixed form. Children…operate among themselves in a world of informal and oral communication, unimpeded by the necessity of maintaining and transmitting information by written means. This is as close as folklorists can come to observing the transmission and social function of this folk knowledge before the spread of literacy during the 19th century.
As we have seen with the other genres, the original collections of children's lore and games in the 19th century was driven by a fear that the culture of childhood would die out. Early folklorists, among them Alice Gomme in Britain and William Wells Newell in the United States, felt a need to capture the unstructured and unsupervised street life and activities of children before it was lost. This fear proved to be unfounded. In a comparison of any modern school playground during recess and the painting of "Children's Games" by Pieter Breugel the Elder we can see that the activity level is similar, and many of the games from the 1560 painting are recognizable and comparable to modern variations still played today.
These same artifacts of childlore, in innumerable variations, also continue to serve the same function of learning and practicing skills needed for growth. So bouncing and swinging rhythms and rhymes encourage development of balance and coordination in infants and children. Verbal rhymes like Peter Piper picked... serve to increase both the oral and aural acuity of children. Songs and chants, accessing a different part of the brain, are used to memorize series (Alphabet song). They also provide the necessary beat to complex physical rhythms and movements, be it hand-clapping, jump roping, or ball bouncing. Furthermore, many physical games are used to develop strength, coordination and endurance of the players. For some team games, negotiations about the rules can run on longer than the game itself as social skills are rehearsed. Even as we are just now uncovering the neuroscience that undergirds the developmental function of this childlore, the artifacts themselves have been in play for centuries.
Below is listed just a small sampling of types and examples of childlore and games.
A case has been made for considering folk history as a distinct sub-category of folklore, an idea that has received attention from such folklorists as Richard Dorson. This field of study is represented in "The Folklore Historian", an annual journal sponsored by the History and Folklore Section of the American Folklore Society and concerned with the connections of folklore with history, as well as the history of folklore studies. 
The study of folk history is particularly well developed in Ireland, where the "Handbook of Irish Folklore" (the standard book used by field workers of the Irish Folklore Commission) recognizes "historical tradition" as a separate category, traditionally referred to as "seanchas". Henry Glassie made a pioneering contribution in his classic study, "Passing the Time in Ballymenone". Another notable exponent is historian Guy Beiner who has presented in-depth studies of Irish folk history, identifying a number of characteristic genres for what he has named "history telling", such as stories (divided into tales and "mini-histories"), songs and ballads (especially rebel songs), poems, rhymes, toasts, prophecies, proverbs and sayings, place-names, and a variety of commemorative ritual practices. These are often recited by dedicated storytellers ("seanchaithe") and folk historians ("staireolaithe"). Beiner has since adopted the term "vernacular historiography" in an attempt to move beyond the confines of "the artificial divides between oral and literary cultures that lie at the heart of conceptualizations of oral tradition".
Lacking context, folklore artifacts would be uninspiring objects without any life of their own. It is only through performance that the artifacts come alive as an active and meaningful component of a social group; the intergroup communication arises in the performance and this is where transmission of these cultural elements takes place. American folklorist Roger D. Abrahams has described it thus: "Folklore is folklore only when performed. As organized entities of performance, items of folklore have a sense of control inherent in them, a power that can be capitalized upon and enhanced through effective performance." Without transmission, these items are not folklore, they are just individual quirky tales and objects.
This understanding in folkloristics only occurred in the second half of the 20th century, when the two terms "folklore performance" and "text and context" dominated discussions among folklorists. These terms are not contradictory or even mutually exclusive. As borrowings from other fields of study, one or the other linguistic formulation is more appropriate to any given discussion. Performance is frequently tied to verbal and customary lore, whereas context is used in discussions of material lore. Both formulations offer different perspectives on the same folkloric understanding, specifically that folklore artifacts need to remain embedded in their cultural environment if we are to gain insight into their meaning for the community.
The concept of cultural (folklore) performance is shared with ethnography and anthropology among other social sciences. The cultural anthropologist Victor Turner identified four universal characteristics of cultural performance: playfulness, framing, the use of symbolic language, and employing the subjunctive mood. In viewing the performance, the audience leaves the daily reality to move into a mode of make-believe, or "what if?" It is self-evident that this fits well with all types of verbal lore, where reality has no place among the symbols, fantasies, and nonsense of traditional tales, proverbs, and jokes. Customs and the lore of children and games also fit easily into the language of a folklore performance.
Material culture requires some moulding to turn it into a performance. Should we consider the performance of the creation of the artifact, as in a quilting party, or the performance of the recipients who use the quilt to cover their marriage bed? Here the language of context works better to describe the quilting of patterns copied from the grandmother, quilting as a social event during the winter months, or the gifting of a quilt to signify the importance of the event. Each of these—the traditional pattern chosen, the social event, and the gifting—occur within the broader context of the community. Even so, when considering context, the structure and characteristics of performance can be recognized, including an audience, a framing event, and the use of decorative figures and symbols, all of which go beyond the utility of the object.
Before the Second World War, folk artifacts had been understood and collected as cultural shards of an earlier time. They were considered individual vestigial artifacts, with little or no function in the contemporary culture. Given this understanding, the goal of the folklorist was to capture and document them before they disappeared. They were collected with no supporting data, bound in books, archived and classified more or less successfully. The Historic–Geographic Method worked to isolate and track these collected artifacts, mostly verbal lore, across space and time.
Following the Second World War, folklorists began to articulate a more holistic approach toward their subject matter. In tandem with the growing sophistication in the , attention was no longer limited to the isolated artifact, but extended to include the artifact embedded in an active cultural environment. One early proponent was Alan Dundes with his essay "Texture, Text and Context", first published 1964. A public presentation in 1967 by Dan Ben-Amos at the American Folklore Society brought the behavioral approach into open debate among folklorists. In 1972 Richard Dorson called out the "young Turks" for their movement toward a behavioral approach to folklore. This approach "shifted the conceptualization of folklore as an extractable item or 'text' to an emphasis on folklore as a kind of human behavior and communication. Conceptualizing folklore as behavior redefined the job of folklorists..."
Folklore became a verb, an action, something that people do, not just something that they have. It is in the performance and the active context that folklore artifacts get transmitted in informal, direct communication, either verbally or in demonstration. Performance includes all the different modes and manners in which this transmission occurs.
Transmission is a communicative process requiring a binary: one individual or group who actively transmits information in some form to another individual or group. Each of these is a defined role in the folklore process. The tradition-bearer is the individual who actively passes along the knowledge of an artifact; this can be either a mother singing a lullaby to her baby, or an Irish dance troupe performing at a local festival. They are named individuals, usually well known in the community as knowledgeable in their traditional lore. They are not the anonymous "folk", the nameless mass without of history or individuality.
The audience of this performance is the other half in the transmission process; they listen, watch, and remember. Few of them will become active tradition-bearers; many more will be passive tradition-bearers who maintain a memory of this specific traditional artifact, in both its presentation and its content.
There is active communication between the audience and the performer. The performer is presenting to the audience; the audience in turn, through its actions and reactions, is actively communicating with the performer. The purpose of this performance is not to create something new but to re-create something that already exists; the performance is words and actions which are known, recognized and valued by both the performer and the audience. For folklore is first and foremost remembered behavior. As members of the same cultural reference group, they identify and value this performance as a piece of shared cultural knowledge.
To initiate the performance, there must be a frame of some sort to indicate that what is to follow is indeed performance. The frame brackets it as outside of normal discourse. In customary lore such as life cycle celebrations (ex. birthday) or dance performances, the framing occurs as part of the event, frequently marked by location. The audience goes to the event location to participate. Games are defined primarily by rules, it is with the initiation of the rules that the game is framed. The folklorist Barre Toelken describes an evening spent in a Navaho family playing string figure games, with each of the members shifting from performer to audience as they create and display different figures to each other.
In verbal lore, the performer will start and end with recognized linguistic formulas. An easy example is seen in the common introduction to a joke: "Have you heard the one...", "Joke of the day...", or "An elephant walks into a bar". Each of these signals to the listeners that the following is a joke, not to be taken literally. The joke is completed with the punch line of the joke. Another traditional narrative marker in English is the framing of a fairy tale between the phrases "Once upon a time" and "They all lived happily ever after." Many languages have similar phrases which are used to frame a traditional tale. Each of these linguistic formulas removes the bracketed text from ordinary discourse, and marks it as a recognized form of stylized, formulaic communication for both the performer and the audience.
Framing as a narrative device serves to signal to both the story teller and the audience that the narrative which follows is indeed a fiction (verbal lore), and not to be understood as historical fact or reality. It moves the framed narration into the subjunctive mood, and marks a space in which "fiction, history, story, tradition, art, teaching, all exist within the narrated or performed expressive 'event' outside the normal realms and constraints of reality or time." This shift from the realis to the irrealis mood is understood by all participants within the reference group. It enables these fictional events to contain meaning for the group, and can lead to very real consequences.
The theory of self-correction in folklore transmission was first articulated by the folklorist Walter Anderson in the 1920s; this posits a feedback mechanism which would keep folklore variants closer to the original form.
This theory addresses the question about how, with multiple performers and multiple audiences, the artifact maintains its identity across time and geography. Anderson credited the audience with censoring narrators who deviated too far from the known (traditional) text.
Any performance is a two-way communication process. The performer addresses the audience with words and actions; the audience in turn actively responds to the performer. If this performance deviates too far from audience expectations of the familiar folk artifact, they will respond with negative feedback. Wanting to avoid more negative reaction, the performer will adjust his performance to conform to audience expectations. "Social reward by an audience [is] a major factor in motivating narrators..." It is this dynamic feedback loop between performer and audience which gives stability to the text of the performance.
In reality, this model is not so simplistic; there is multiple redundancy in the active folklore process. The performer has heard the tale multiple times, he has heard it from different story tellers in multiple versions. In turn, he tells the tale multiple times to the same or a different audience, and they expect to hear the version they know. This expanded model of redundancy in a non-linear narrative process makes it difficult to innovate during any single performance; corrective feedback from the audience will be immediate. "At the heart of both autopoetic self-maintenance and the 'virality' of meme transmission... it is enough to assume that some sort of recursive action maintains a degree of integrity [of the artifact] in certain features ... sufficient to allow us to recognize it as an instance of its type."
For material folk artifacts, it becomes more fruitful to return to the terminology of Alan Dundes: text and context. Here the text designates the physical artifact itself, the single item made by an individual for a specific purpose. The context is then unmasked by observation and questions concerning both its production and its usage. Why was it made, how was it made, who will use it, how will they use it, where did the raw materials come from, who designed it, etc. These questions are limited only by the skill of the interviewer.
In his study of southeastern Kentucky chair makers, Michael Owen Jones describes production of a chair within the context of the life of the craftsman. For Henry Glassie in his study of Folk Housing in Middle Virginia the investigation concerns the historical pattern he finds repeated in the dwellings of this region: the house is planted in the landscape just as the landscape completes itself with the house. The artisan in his roadside stand or shop in the nearby town wants to make and display products which appeal to customers. There is "a craftsperson's eagerness to produce 'satisfactory items' due to a close personal contact with the customer and expectations to serve the customer again." Here the role of consumer "... is the basic force responsible for the continuity and discontinuity of behavior."
In material culture the context becomes the cultural environment in which the object is made (chair), used (house), and sold (wares). None of these artisans is "anonymous" folk; they are individuals making a living with the tools and skills learned within and valued in the context of their community.
No two performances are identical. The performer attempts to keep the performance within expectations, but this happens despite a multitude of changing variables. He has given this performance one time more or less, the audience is different, the social and political environment has changed. In the context of material culture, no two hand-crafted items are identical. Sometimes these deviations in the performance and the production are unintentional, just part of the process. But sometimes these deviations are intentional; the performer or artisan want to play with the boundaries of expectation and add their own creative touch. They perform within the tension of conserving the recognized form and adding innovation.
The folklorist Barre Toelken identifies this tension as "... a combination of both changing ("dynamic") and static ("conservative") elements that evolve and change through sharing, communication and performance." Over time, the cultural context shifts and morphs: new leaders, new technologies, new values, new awareness. As the context changes, so must the artifact, for without modifications to map existing artifacts into the evolving cultural landscape, they lose their meaning. Joking as an active form of verbal lore makes this tension visible as joke cycles come and go to reflect new issues of concern. Once an artifact is no longer applicable to the context, transmission becomes a nonstarter; it loses relevancy for a contemporary audience. If it is not transmitted, then it is no longer folklore and becomes instead an historic relic.
It is too soon to identify how the advent of electronic communications will modify and change the performance and transmission of folklore artifacts. Just by looking at the development of one type of verbal lore, electronic joking, it is clear that the internet is modifying folkloric process, not killing it. Jokes and joking are as plentiful as ever both in traditional face-to-face interactions and through electronic transmission. New communication modes are also transforming traditional stories into many different configurations. The fairy tale Snow White is now offered in multiple media forms for both children and adults, including a television show and video game.
A more generalized analysis of folklore in the electronic age will have to wait for further studies to be published in the field.

</doc>
<doc id="11304" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11304" title="Fusion cuisine">
Fusion cuisine

Fusion cuisine is cuisine that combines elements of different culinary traditions that originate from different countries, regions, or cultures. Cuisines of this type are not categorized according to any one particular cuisine style and have played a part in innovations of many contemporary restaurant cuisines since the 1970s.
Fusion food is a general term for the combination of various forms of cookery and comes in several forms. Even though fusion food is often the invention by chefs, fusion cuisine can occur naturally within the different cuisines of a region or sub-region. These can include larger regions, such as East Asian cuisine, European cuisine, and Southwestern American cuisine, as well as more specific and lauded ethnic cuisines such as Chinese cuisine, Japanese cuisine, Korean cuisine, French cuisine, Italian cuisine, and New Mexican cuisine.
Chefs within Asian fusion restaurants combine the various cuisines of different Asian countries, have become popular in many parts of the United States and United Kingdom. Often featured are East Asian, Southeast Asian, and South Asian dishes alongside one another and offering dishes that are inspired combinations of such cuisines. California cuisine is considered a fusion culture, taking inspiration particularly from Italy, France, Mexico, the idea of the European delicatessen, and East Asia, and then creating traditional dishes from these cultures with non-traditional ingredients - such as California pizza. One major example is Oceanic cuisine, which combines the different cuisines of the various island nations. In the United Kingdom, fish and chips can be seen as an early fusion dish due to its marrying of ingredients stemming from Jewish, French, and Belgian cuisines. Filipino cuisine is also sometimes characterized as the "original Asian fusion cuisine", combining native culinary traditions and ingredients with the very different cuisines of Spain, Latin America, China, and the United States, among others, due to its unique colonial history.
In Australia, due to the increasing influx of migrants, fusion cuisine is being reinvented and is becoming increasingly the norm at numerous cafes and restaurants, with Modern Australian Asian-fusion restaurants like Tetsuya's in Sydney ranking highly in The World's 50 Best Restaurants. Another incarnation of fusion cuisine implements a more eclectic approach, which generally features original dishes that combine varieties of ingredients from various cuisines and regions. Such a restaurant might feature a wide variety of dishes inspired by a combination of various regional cuisines with new ideas. Foods in Malaysia (also Indonesia) are another popular example of fusion cuisine between Malay, Javanese, Chinese and Indian and light influences from Thai, Portuguese, Dutch, and British cuisines.
Foods based on one culture, but prepared using ingredients and flavors inherent to another culture, are also considered forms of fusion cuisine. For instance, pizza made with cheddar and pepper jack cheese, salsa, refried beans or other common taco ingredients is often marketed as "Taco Pizza". This particular dish is a fusion of Italian and Mexican cuisines. Similar approaches have been used for fusion-sushi, such as rolling maki with different types of rice and ingredients such as curry and basmati rice, cheese and salsa with Spanish rice, or spiced ground lamb and capers rolled with Greek-style rice and grape leaves, which resembles inside-out dolmades. Some fusion cuisines have themselves become accepted as a national cuisine, as with Peruvian Nikkei cuisine, which combines Japanese spices and seasonings and Peruvian ingredients like ají (Peruvian peppers) with seafood. A quintessential Peruvian Nikkei dish is 'Maki Acevichado' or ceviche roll, containing Peruvian-style marinated fish rolled up with rice, avocado, or seaweed."
This type of restaurant's success depends on a number of factors. Among these are:
Wolfgang Puck is attributed as one of the pioneers of fusion cuisine, with some dispute. However, his restaurant "Chinois on Main" was named after the term attributed to Richard Wing, who in the 1960s combined French and Chinese cooking at the former Imperial Dynasty restaurant in Hanford, California.

</doc>
<doc id="11306" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11306" title="Frame problem">
Frame problem

In artificial intelligence, the frame problem describes an issue with using first-order logic (FOL) to express facts about a robot in the world. Representing the state of a robot with traditional FOL requires the use of many axioms that simply imply that things in the environment do not change arbitrarily. For example, Hayes describes a "block world" with rules about stacking blocks together. In a FOL system, additional axioms are required to make inferences about the environment (for example, that a block cannot change position unless it is physically moved). The frame problem is the problem of finding adequate collections of axioms for a viable description of a robot environment.
John McCarthy and Patrick J. Hayes defined this problem in their 1969 article, "Some Philosophical Problems from the Standpoint of Artificial Intelligence". In this paper, and many that came after, the formal mathematical problem was a starting point for more general discussions of the difficulty of knowledge representation for artificial intelligence. Issues such as how to provide rational default assumptions and what humans consider common sense in a virtual environment. Later, the term acquired a broader meaning in philosophy, where it is formulated as the problem of limiting the beliefs that have to be updated in response to actions. In the logical context, actions are typically specified by what they change, with the implicit assumption that everything else (the frame) remains unchanged.
The frame problem occurs even in very simple domains. A scenario with a door, which can be open or closed, and a light, which can be on or off, is statically represented by two propositions formula_1 and formula_2. If these conditions can change, they are better represented by two predicates formula_3 and formula_4 that depend on time; such predicates are called fluents. A domain in which the door is closed and the light off at time 0, and the door opened at time 1, can be directly represented in logic by the following formulae:
The first two formulae represent the initial situation; the third formula represents the effect of executing the action of opening the door at time 1. If such an action had preconditions, such as the door being unlocked, it would have been represented by formula_8. In practice, one would have a predicate formula_9 for specifying when an action is executed and a rule formula_10 for specifying the effects of actions. The article on the situation calculus gives more details.
While the three formulae above are a direct expression in logic of what is known, they do not suffice to correctly draw consequences. While the following conditions (representing the expected situation) are consistent with the three formulae above, they are not the only ones.
Indeed, another set of conditions that is consistent with the three formulae above is:
The frame problem is that specifying only which conditions are changed by the actions does not entail that all other conditions are not changed. This problem can be solved by adding the so-called “frame axioms”, which explicitly specify that all conditions not affected by actions are not changed while executing that action. For example, since the action executed at time 0 is that of opening the door, a frame axiom would state that the status of the light does not change from time 0 to time 1:
The frame problem is that one such frame axiom is necessary for every pair of action and condition such that the action does not affect the condition. In other words, the problem is that of formalizing a dynamical domain without explicitly specifying the frame axioms.
The solution proposed by McCarthy to solve this problem involves assuming that a minimal amount of condition changes have occurred; this solution is formalized using the framework of circumscription. The Yale shooting problem, however, shows that this solution is not always correct. Alternative solutions were then proposed, involving predicate completion, fluent occlusion, successor state axioms, etc.; they are explained below. By the end of the 1980s, the frame problem as defined by McCarthy and Hayes was solved. Even after that, however, the term “frame problem” was still used, in part to refer to the same problem but under different settings (e.g., concurrent actions), and in part to refer to the general problem of representing and reasoning with dynamical domains.
The following solutions depict how the frame problem is solved in various formalisms. The formalisms themselves are not presented in full: what is presented are simplified versions that are sufficient to explain the full solution.
This solution was proposed by Erik Sandewall, who also defined a formal language for the specification of dynamical domains; therefore, such a domain can be first expressed in this language and then automatically translated into logic. In this article, only the expression in logic is shown, and only in the simplified language with no action names.
The rationale of this solution is to represent not only the value of conditions over time, but also whether they can be affected by the last executed action. The latter is represented by another condition, called occlusion. A condition is said to be "occluded" in a given time point if an action has been just executed that makes the condition true or false as an effect. Occlusion can be viewed as “permission to change”: if a condition is occluded, it is relieved from obeying the constraint of inertia.
In the simplified example of the door and the light, occlusion can be formalized by two predicates formula_12 and formula_13. The rationale is that a condition can change value only if the corresponding occlusion predicate is true at the next time point. In turn, the occlusion predicate is true only when an action affecting the condition is executed.
In general, every action making a condition true or false also makes the corresponding occlusion predicate true. In this case, formula_19 is true, making the antecedent of the fourth formula above false for formula_20; therefore, the constraint that formula_21 does not hold for formula_20. Therefore, formula_1 can change value, which is also what is enforced by the third formula.
In order for this condition to work, occlusion predicates have to be true only when they are made true as an effect of an action. This can be achieved either by circumscription or by predicate completion. It is worth noticing that occlusion does not necessarily imply a change: for example, executing the action of opening the door when it was already open (in the formalization above) makes the predicate formula_24 true and makes formula_1 true; however, formula_1 has not changed value, as it was true already.
This encoding is similar to the fluent occlusion solution, but the additional predicates denote change, not permission to change. For example, formula_27 represents the fact that the predicate formula_1 will change from time formula_29 to formula_30. As a result, a predicate changes if and only if the corresponding change predicate is true. An action results in a change if and only if it makes true a condition that was previously false or vice versa.
The third formula is a different way of saying that opening the door causes the door to be opened. Precisely, it states that opening the door changes the state of the door if it had been previously closed. The last two conditions state that a condition changes value at time formula_29 if and only if the corresponding change predicate is true at time formula_29. To complete the solution, the time points in which the change predicates are true have to be as few as possible, and this can be done by applying predicate completion to the rules specifying the effects of actions.
The value of a condition after the execution of an action can be determined by
the fact that the condition is true if and only if:
A successor state axiom is a formalization in logic of these two facts. For
example, if formula_38 and formula_39 are two
conditions used to denote that the action executed at time formula_29 was
to open or close the door, respectively, the running example is encoded as
follows.
This solution is centered around the value of conditions, rather than the
effects of actions. In other words, there is an axiom for every condition,
rather than a formula for every action. Preconditions to actions (which are not
present in this example) are formalized by other formulae. The successor state
axioms are used in the variant to the situation calculus proposed by
Ray Reiter.
The fluent calculus is a variant of the situation calculus. It solves the frame problem by using first-order logic
terms, rather than predicates, to represent the states. Converting
predicates into terms in first-order logic is called reification; the
fluent calculus can be seen as a logic in which predicates representing the
state of conditions are reified.
The difference between a predicate and a term in first-order logic is that a term is a representation of an object (possibly a complex object composed of other objects), while a predicate represents a condition that can be true or false when evaluated over a given set of terms.
In the fluent calculus, each possible state is represented by a term obtained by composition of other terms, each one representing the conditions that are true in state. For example, the state in which the door is open and the light is on is represented by the term formula_45. It is important to notice that a term is not true or false by itself, as it is an object and not a condition. In other words, the term formula_45 represent a possible state, and does not by itself mean that this is the current state. A separate condition can be stated to specify that this is actually the state at a given time, e.g., formula_47 means that this is the state at time formula_48.
The solution to the frame problem given in the fluent calculus is to specify the effects of actions by stating how a term representing the state changes when the action is executed. For example, the action of opening the door at time 0 is represented by the formula:
The action of closing the door, which makes a condition false instead of true, is represented in a slightly different way:
This formula works provided that suitable axioms are given about formula_51 and formula_52, e.g., a term containing the same condition twice is not a valid state (for example, formula_53 is always false for every formula_54 and formula_29).
The event calculus uses terms for representing fluents, like the fluent calculus, but also has axioms constraining the value of fluents, like the successor state axioms. In the event calculus, inertia is enforced by formulae stating that a fluent is true if it has been true at a given previous time point and no action changing it to false has been performed in the meantime. Predicate completion is still needed in the event calculus for obtaining that a fluent is made true only if an action making it true has been performed, but also for obtaining that an action had been performed only if that is explicitly stated.
The frame problem can be thought of as the problem of formalizing the principle that, by default, "everything is presumed to remain in the state in which it is" (Leibniz, "An Introduction to a Secret Encyclopædia", "c". 1679). This default, sometimes called the "commonsense law of inertia", was expressed by Raymond Reiter in default logic:
(if formula_57 is true in situation formula_54, and it can be assumed that formula_57 remains true after executing action formula_60, then we can conclude that formula_57 remains true).
Steve Hanks and Drew McDermott argued, on the basis of their Yale shooting example, that this solution to the frame problem is unsatisfactory. Hudson Turner showed, however, that it works correctly in the presence of appropriate additional postulates.
The counterpart of the default logic solution in the language of answer set programming is a rule with strong negation:
(if formula_63 is true at time formula_64, and it can be assumed that formula_63 remains true at time formula_66, then we can conclude that formula_63 remains true).
Separation logic is a formalism for reasoning about computer programs using pre/post specifications of the form formula_68. Separation logic is an extension of Hoare logic oriented to reasoning about mutable data structures in computer memory and other dynamic resources, and it has a special connective *, pronounced "and separately", to support independent reasoning about disjoint memory regions.
Separation logic employs a "tight" interpretation of pre/post specs, which say that the code can "only" access memory locations guaranteed to exist by the precondition. This leads to the soundness of the most important inference rule of the logic, the "frame rule"
formula_69
The frame rule allows descriptions of arbitrary memory outside the footprint (memory accessed) of the code to be added to a specification: this enables the initial specification to concentrate only on the footprint. For example, the inference
formula_70
captures that code which sorts a list "x" does not unsort a separate list "y," and it does this without mentioning "y" at all in the initial spec above the line.
Automation of the frame rule has led to significant increases in the scalability of automated reasoning techniques for code, eventually deployed industrially to codebases with 10s of millions of lines.
There appears to be some similarity between the separation logic solution to the frame problem and that of the fluent calculus mentioned above.
Action description languages elude the frame problem rather than solving it. An action description language is a formal language with a syntax that is specific for describing situations and actions. For example, that the action formula_71 makes the door open if not locked is expressed by:
The semantics of an action description language depends on what the language can express (concurrent actions, delayed effects, etc.) and is usually based on transition systems.
Since domains are expressed in these languages rather than directly in logic, the frame problem only arises when a specification given in an action description logic is to be translated into logic. Typically, however, a translation is given from these languages to answer set programming rather than first-order logic.

</doc>
<doc id="11307" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11307" title="Frans Eemil Sillanpää">
Frans Eemil Sillanpää

Frans Eemil Sillanpää () (16 September 1888 – 3 June 1964) was one of the most famous Finnish writers and in 1939 became the first Finnish writer to be awarded the Nobel Prize for literature "for his deep understanding of his country's peasantry and the exquisite art with which he has portrayed their way of life and their relationship with Nature".
Frans Eemil Sillanpää was born into a peasant farming family in Hämeenkyrö. Although his parents were poor, they managed to send him to school in Tampere. At school Sillanpää was a good student and with aid from his benefactor Henrik Liljeroos he entered the University of Helsinki in 1908 to study medicine. Here his acquaintances included the painters Eero Järnefelt and Pekka Halonen, composer Jean Sibelius and author Juhani Aho.
Five years later, in 1913 Sillanpää moved from Helsinki to his old home village and devoted himself to writing. In 1914 Sillanpää wrote articles for the newspaper "Uusi Suometar". In 1916 Sillanpää married Sigrid Maria Salomäki, whom he had met in 1914.
By principle, Sillanpää was against all forms of violence and believed in scientific optimism. In his work he portrayed rural people as living united with the land.
The novel "Hurskas kurjuus" (Meek Heritage) (1919) depicted the reasons for Finnish Civil War, and despite its objectivity, was controversial at the time.
Sillanpää won international fame for his novel "Nuorena nukkunut" (translated to English as "The Maid Silja") in 1931.
In 1939, he was awarded the Nobel Prize in Literature "for his deep understanding of his country's peasantry and the exquisite art with which he has portrayed their way of life and their relationship with Nature." A few days after he received the prize, talks between Finland and Soviet Union broke down and the Winter War began. Sillanpää donated the golden medal to be melted for funds to aid the war effort.
Before the Winter War, Sillanpää wrote the lyrics for what is known as "Sillanpään marssilaulu" to lift his spirits when his eldest son Esko was partaking in military practices at Karelian Isthmus.
In 1939 his wife Sigrid died of pneumonia leaving eight children with Sillanpää. Some time after, Sillanpää married his secretary Anna von Hertzen (1900-1983) and traveled to Stockholm to receive the Nobel prize.
In 1941 Sillanpää divorced his wife Anna. His alcoholism and other ailments needed hospital treatment. In 1943 he returned to public life as a bearded old 'Grandpa Sillanpää'. His radio appearances, especially his tradition of talking on Christmas Eve from 1945 to 1963 became very popular.
The asteroid 1446 Sillanpää, discovered on January 26, 1938 by the renowned Finnish astronomer and physicist Yrjö Väisälä, was named after him.
Sillanpää died on 3 June 1964 in Helsinki aged 75.
Numerous of his works have been made into films:

</doc>
<doc id="11310" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11310" title="February 27">
February 27


</doc>
<doc id="11311" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11311" title="February 28">
February 28


</doc>
<doc id="11312" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11312" title="Flambards">
Flambards

Flambards is a novel for children or young adults by K. M. Peyton, first published by Oxford University Press in 1967 with illustrations by Victor Ambrus. Alternatively, "Flambards" is the trilogy (1967–1969) or series (1967–1981) named after its first book. The series is set in England just before, during, and after World War I.
The novel "Flambards" (book one) features a teenage orphan and heiress Christina Parsons, who comes to live at Flambards, the impoverished Essex estate owned by her crippled and tyrannical uncle, William Russell, and his two sons, Mark and Will.
Christina Parsons, who has been shunted around the family since she was orphaned at the age of five years in 1901, is sent to live at Flambards with her mother's half-brother, the crippled Russell. Her Aunt Grace speculates that Russell plans for Christina to marry his son Mark to restore Flambards to its former glory using the money that she will inherit on her twenty-first birthday. Mark is as brutish as his father, with a great love for hunting, whereas the younger son William is terrified of horses after a hunting accident and aspires to be an aviator. Christina soon finds friendship with the injured William, who challenges her ideas on class boundaries, as well as her love for horses and hunting. William and Christina eventually fall in love and run away from the hunt ball to London, hoping to marry.
The fourth book controversially reversed the ending of the original trilogy, twelve years later and following the television series.
For "The Edge of the Cloud", Peyton won the annual Carnegie Medal from the Library Association, recognising the year's best children's book by a British subject. She was a commended runner-up for both the first and third books, the latter in competition with her Medal-winning work.
She also won the 1970 Guardian Children's Fiction Prize, conferred by "The Guardian" newspaper and judged by a panel of British children's writers. Ordinarily the prize recognises one fiction book published during the preceding calendar year; exceptionally Peyton won for the Flambards trilogy completed in 1969.
The trilogy was adapted as a 13-part television series in 1979, "Flambards" starring Christine McKenna as Christina Parsons.
World Publishing issued a US edition of the first book in 1968, retaining the Ambrus illustrations. World (Cleveland and New York) also published US editions of the second and third books in 1969 and 1970, also with the original illustrations, although all three novels were reset with a greater page-counts.

</doc>
<doc id="11313" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11313" title="Father Ted">
Father Ted

Father Ted is a sitcom created by Irish writers Graham Linehan and Arthur Mathews and produced by British production company Hat Trick Productions for Channel 4. The show originally aired over three series from 21 April 1995 until 1 May 1998, including a Christmas special, for a total of 25 episodes. The show aired on RTÉ Two in Ireland, on Nine Network (series 1) and ABC Television (series 2 and 3) in Australia, and on TV3 in New Zealand.
Set on the fictional Craggy Island, a remote location off Ireland's west coast, the show starred Dermot Morgan as the eponymous Father Ted Crilly, alongside fellow priests Father Dougal McGuire (Ardal O'Hanlon) and Father Jack Hackett (Frank Kelly). Exiled on the island for various past incidents, the priests live together in the parochial house with their housekeeper Mrs Doyle (Pauline McLynn). The show was critically acclaimed, receiving several BAFTA awards, and remains a popular sitcom in the UK and Ireland. In a 2001 poll by Channel 4, Dougal was ranked fifth on their list of the 100 Greatest TV Characters. In 2019, "Father Ted" was ranked second to "Fawlty Towers" in a list of "the greatest British sitcoms" compiled by a panel of comedy experts for the "Radio Times".
The show follows the misadventures of three Irish Roman Catholic priests who live in a parish on the fictional Craggy Island, located off the west coast of Ireland. Father Ted Crilly, Father Dougal McGuire and Father Jack Hackett live chaotically together in Craggy Island's parochial house, along with their housekeeper Mrs Doyle, who always wants to serve them tea.
The three priests answer to Bishop Len Brennan, who has banished them to Craggy Island as punishment for different incidents in their past: Ted for alleged financial impropriety (apparently involving some money 'resting' in his account and a child being deprived of a visit to Lourdes so that Ted could go to Las Vegas), Dougal for something only referred to as the "Blackrock Incident" (resulting in many nuns' "lives [being] irreparably damaged"), and Jack for his alcoholism and womanising, particularly for an incident at a wedding in Athlone.
The show revolves around the priests' lives on Craggy Island, sometimes dealing with matters of the church but more often dealing with Father Ted's schemes to either resolve a situation with the parish or other Craggy Island residents, or to win games of one-upmanship against his enemy, Father Dick Byrne of the nearby Rugged Island parish.
"Father Ted" ran for three series from 1995 to 1998, including a Christmas special. A total of 25 episodes were produced.
Linehan and Mathews first met while working at "Hot Press". In the late 1980s, Mathews, Paul Woodfull and Kieran Woodfull formed The Joshua Trio, a U2 tribute band. The trio began writing comedy sketches to accompany their act. Mathews created the Father Ted character for his short-lived stand-up routine. Before The Joshua Trio played at gigs, Mathews would occasionally come on-stage as Father Ted and tell jokes involving his great friend, Father Dougal McGuire.
In 1991, Mathews left his job at "Hot Press" and moved into Linehan's London home. Over the next three to four years, they worked on rough ideas for shows while at the same time writing for sketch shows such as "The All New Alexei Sayle Show" and "The Fast Show". One of these ideas was for a comedy mockumentary series called "Irish Lives", with six episodes, each focusing on a different character living somewhere in Ireland. They scripted an episode centring on a priest named Father Ted Crilly, who visits his friends in the seminary in Maynooth College. Producer Geoffrey Perkins suggested that the episode's concept be dramatised and rewritten as a sitcom.
In the January 1994 issue of In Dublin (Vol 19, No2), Mathews and Linehan told Damian Corless, who had initially introduced the pair to each other, of their work in progress, describing Ted as "basically a nice man", Dougal as "nice but really stupid" and Jack as "a hideous creature". Linehan revealed: "They've all been sent to this isolated place called Craggy Island because they're crap priests." Mathews elaborated: "They've each a terrible secret which is why they've been banished to this place, and the terrible thing is that they can't get away from each other. Obviously it's not entirely reality based." Mathews was originally intended to play Ted, but decided he lacked the acting ability the role required. Maurice O'Donoghue, who plays Father Dick in the series, was their second choice for the role of Ted, being the right age and having a similar look and lightness. Mathews always preferred Dermot Morgan; Linehan was initially reluctant, fearing he would play Ted the same as "Father Trendy", a character he played on the RTÉ television show "The Live Mike", but Morgan lobbied hard for the role and was cast.
The show was pitched directly to the UK's Hat Trick Productions and Channel 4 by the duo, contrary to rumours that RTÉ (the Irish national broadcaster) were originally offered the series but rejected it.
Three series and one Christmas special were aired. Declan Lowney directed the first two series and the Christmas special, while the third series was directed by Linehan (location scenes) and Andy De Emmony (studio scenes). In addition, Morgan and O'Hanlon hosted an hour of Comic Relief in character, during which Kelly and McLynn also made brief guest appearances. One day after the shooting of series three wrapped, Dermot Morgan died of a heart attack, aged 45. As a mark of respect, the third series was first broadcast a week later than originally planned.
The show was already scheduled to conclude with the third season prior to Morgan's death, as Morgan said that he did not want to continue playing the role of Father Ted for fear of being typecast: "I don't want to be the next Clive Dunn and end up playing the same character for years."
Following Morgan's death, the production company received calls from numerous agents and casting directors suggesting either new actors for the role of Ted or spin-offs without the character; Linehan and Mathews declined all offers.
In 1994, the writers asked alternative rock band Pulp to compose the theme music for "Father Ted", requesting a parody of a typical sitcom theme. When Pulp declined involvement, they contacted Neil Hannon, frontman of Northern Irish chamber pop band The Divine Comedy. Hannon's first effort, a jaunty composition, was rejected on Geoffrey Perkins's advice. Hannon composed a second theme, which the team found acceptable. This theme was recorded by Hannon and co-producer Darren Allison at The Jesus and Mary Chain's private studio. One of William Reid's guitars was selected by Allison and Hannon to carry the main tune, which was played by Hannon. Both themes were also reworked, with new lyrics, for inclusion on The Divine Comedy's 1996 album "Casanova": the final "Father Ted" theme became "Songs of Love", while Hannon's rejected theme became "A Woman of the World".
In 2010, Linehan discussed the dramatic effect this choice had on the tone of the series: "'Woman of the World' was kind of like a jaunty, plinky-plonky song, and we wanted that song. He [Hannon] gave us two choices: he gave us that, and 'Songs of Love', and we wanted the plinky-plonky song because our idea was we were making fun of sitcoms. We were saying, you know, we don't like sitcoms. This is a parody of sitcoms. This is a kind of satire on sitcoms. And I remember Geoffrey [Perkins] looking really glum and sad about this, you know? And then he said, 'Why do you want to make fun of your characters?' He said, 'People will love these characters.' And that was just a real revelation for me, and after that, whatever he said went, as far as I was concerned."
The Divine Comedy also contributed most of the show's original music, including the songs "Big Men in Frocks" (for the episode "Rock-a-Hula Ted"), "My Lovely Horse" and "The Miracle is Mine" (for "A Song for Europe"), and "My Lovely Mayo Mammy" (for "Night of the Nearly Dead"). Neil Hannon also provided Ted and Dougal's vocals in the dream sequence version of "My Lovely Horse", which was produced by Allison and Hannon, and later appeared as a B-side on the band's single "Gin Soaked Boy".
Location work for "Father Ted" was done mostly in County Clare, including locations at Corofin, Ennis, Kilfenora, Ennistymon, and Kilnaboy. The Parochial House is McCormack's at Glenquin, on the Boston road from Kilnaboy. The cinema featured in "The Passion of St Tibulus" was the Ormonde Cinema, Greystones, County Wicklow and "The Field", the location for Funland in "'Good Luck, Father Ted'", is in Portrane, North County Dublin. The 'Very Dark Caves' featured in "The Mainland" were the Aillwee caves in the Burren, County Clare.
Some exterior shots for the episode "And God Created Woman" were filmed in Dún Laoghaire, South County Dublin. The opening sequence (including shots of the "Plassy" shipwreck) were filmed over Inisheer — the smallest of the Aran Islands. The interior scenes were recorded at the London Studios in front of a live studio audience.
The series is set in a humorously surreal world in which Ted is the only fully rounded normal character among "caricatures", according to Graham Linehan: "exaggerated-over-friendly, over-quiet, over-stupid, over-dull [...] they really only got one thing, they've got one job."
Embarrassment plays a role in many storylines, in a similar fashion to "Fawlty Towers". Linehan says, "if Ted is in a situation that is slightly embarrassing we get him out of it [...] by having him lying or cheating, basically digging a massive hole for himself". Arthur Mathews has described "Seinfeld" as a major influence on the comedy of "Father Ted", with himself and Linehan being "big fans" of the show. "Father Ted" also contains references to pop culture, and some film parodies, such as the episode "Speed 3".
Regarding the series's religious content, Linehan says "Ted doesn't have an anti-religious view of life, but a non-religious view. It's a job to him. He doesn't care about religion." While writing, he says the show's creators imagined Ted and Dougal as "just two people who happen to be [priests]".
"Father Ted" was met with critical acclaim and is one of the most popular sitcoms in Irish TV history. The Irish media frequently uses the series as a point of comparison in political stories. 
In 1996 and 1999, the show won the BAFTA award for Best Comedy, while Morgan also won Best Comedy Performance. In 1995 the show won Best New TV Comedy at the British Comedy Awards, with O'Hanlon receiving Top TV Comedy Newcomer Award. At the 1996 British Comedy Awards the show won Top Channel 4 Sitcom Award, McLynn took the Top TV Comedy Actress award. In 1997 the show was given the Best Channel 4 Sitcom Award. It was also ranked at number 50 in the BFI's 2000 list of the 100 greatest British television programmes of the 20th century, the highest ranking Channel 4 production on the list. In 2004, it came 11th in the poll for Britain's Best Sitcom. In August 2012, Channel 4 viewers voted the series as the No 1 in "C4's 30 Greatest Comedy Shows".
Notable fans of the show include director Steven Spielberg, musicians Liam Gallagher, Madonna, Cher and Moby, actors Jim Carrey and Steve Martin, comedian Ricky Gervais, and wrestler Sheamus. Maurice Gibb of the Bee Gees was buried with a copy of the DVD box set. Singer-songwriter Sinéad O'Connor is a fan, and attended the recording of the Christmas special. Irish musician Bono also requested to appear in the series.
In January 2007, a dispute arose between Inisheer and Inishmore over which island can claim to be Craggy Island, and thereby host a three-day Friends of Ted Festival. The dispute was settled by a five-a-side football match that February. Inishmore won 2–0 allowing them to use the title of Craggy Island until February 2008, while Inisheer was given the title of Rugged Island. The Friends of Ted Festival, better known as Ted Fest, has been held annually as a "Father Ted" fan convention since 2007. 
In August 2020 An Post released a set of commemorative postage stamps, each with a catchphrase from the series on a background of the parochial house's lurid wallpaper, in a booklet listing Mrs Doyle's guesses for the name of Father Todd Unctious.
On 1 January 2011, Channel 4 dedicated a night of programming to celebrate the show's 15th anniversary year. This included "Father Ted: Unintelligent Design", a documentary on the show's influences, and "Small, Far Away: The World of Father Ted", a documentary revisiting the show's history with the writers and many of the surviving cast (Pauline McLynn declined to take part).
In 2001, Pauline McLynn reprised her role as Mrs Doyle in a run of advertisements for the UK's Inland Revenue, reminding people to get their taxes in on time with her catchphrase from the programme ("Go on, go on, go on..."). It was voted in an Adwatch poll of 1,000 people as the year's worst advertisement.
Later in 2001, Ardal O'Hanlon returned to the role of Father Dougal for a series of PBS advertisements to coincide with "Father Ted"s American broadcast; these segments were included on later DVD releases as "Fundraising with Father Dougal".
In 2012, Frank Kelly made a brief appearance as Father Jack on an episode of "The One Show" with Graham Norton.
In 2014, guest star Ben Keaton returned to the role of Father Austin Purcell, performing a stand-up routine and hosting the pub quiz "Arse Biscuits" in-character. Keaton also set up a Twitter page for the character, and a website where fans can purchase customised Father Purcell video greetings. In 2015, he launched the spin-off web series "Cook Like a Priest".
In February 2016, Over The Top Wrestling marked the anniversary of Morgan's death with "Ah Ted", an event held in Dublin's Tivoli Variety Theatre. During the main-event tag-team match between The Lads From the Flats and The Kings of the North, Patrick McDonnell, Joe Rooney and Michael Redmond reprised their roles as Eoin McLove, Father Damo Lennon and Father Paul Stone respectively. McLove entered the ring first, withstanding one wrestler's attack on his crotch because he has "no willy", but was soon attacked by Father Damo, who brought the whistle he stole from Benson. Father Stone served as a special guest referee, performing a three-count so slow that one wrestler kicked out after two. In 2017, Rooney appeared as Father Damo in the video for Brave Giant's "The Time I Met the Devil", which follows him on the way to give Mass after a night of alcohol and sex.
Since the end of the series, several attempts to remake "Father Ted" have been reported, but none have yet materialised.
In July 2003, it was announced that the show would be remade for the American market. The remake would be scripted by Spike Feresten, who previously wrote for US sitcoms "Seinfeld" and "The Simpsons". Ferensten stated: "I was raised Catholic and this show just felt right to me. The essence of the show is about men who are also priests and, as men, they have many foibles." Hat Trick founders Denise O'Donoghue and Jimmy Mulville were set to produce. The US production company was Pariah Productions, which previously adapted "The Kumars at No. 42" for an American audience.
In March 2004, Supanet Limited reported that an American remake was in development. This version would be set on a fictional island off the coast of New York. Steve Martin and Graham Norton would reportedly play Ted and Dougal. Martin had not been expected to take the role because of his stature, but agreed because he was a fan of the original series, and would reportedly be paid £500,000 per episode. Norton was cast based on his popularity with American audiences, and in reference to his appearance as Father Noel Furlong in the original series.
In November 2007, a separate American remake was announced. Rather than Craggy Island, this version would be set in an unfortunate fishing village in New England. American actor John Michael Higgins was cast as Ted, but expressed concerns about the show's religious themes: "The English have a very robust history of being unkind about religion. We don't have that in our country, we're frightened of it. It's basically that you guys are doing an Irish joke also, we don't have that. So I'll be Father Ted, we'll see how it goes." Filming was scheduled to begin in January 2008.
In January 2015, Linehan said that there had been "a few attempts" by US broadcasters to remake the show, including one which would have been set in Boston – an idea Linehan considered "ridiculous".
In an interview with "Radio Times" in January 2015, Linehan revealed that he wanted to revive "Father Ted" as a musical stage production. He stated that he would never revive the television series itself, "because of the risk you poison people's memories of the original", but that the completely new format would make the project worthwhile. Linehan mentioned the possibility of a dance number with "spinning cardinals". He said that the musical would have to reference the Catholic child abuse scandals, stating, "The jokes would have to have a little bit more edge, because you just can't ignore this stuff." Mathews was "not as convinced" of the musical idea, though Linehan still insisted it could work.
In December, Mathews said that he and Paul Woodfull were developing a Joshua Trio musical and a show focusing on a "Father Michael Cleary-type character", and that the "Father Ted" musical may follow. He expressed concerns that it would "dilute the product" or be seen as a "cash-in", but said that he believed there was an audience for the project.
In April 2017, Linehan said that the musical would draw inspiration from "The Book of Mormon", and would "go for the jugular ... you get all the things people loved about it, all the innocence and all the sweetness, but introduce a harder edge". Linehan also said that, being a special event, the musical would need to focus on a "world-shaking" story, possibly with Ted becoming Pope due to "some weird succession thing". In June, Linehan said that he hoped The Divine Comedy frontman Neil Hannon, who wrote the show's music, would return to compose the songs.
In June 2018, Linehan announced that "Pope Ted: The Father Ted Musical" was nearing completion, with a script by Linehan and Mathews and music by Hannon. Linehan said, "It's the real final episode of "Father Ted". This is true and not one of my stupid jokes, I promise. Didn't want to do something until the right idea came along. This was the right idea. Arthur and I have been laughing our arses off while writing it. Just like the old days".

</doc>
<doc id="11314" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11314" title="Foster's Lager">
Foster's Lager

Foster's Lager is an internationally distributed brand of lager. It is owned by the international brewing group AB InBev, and is brewed under licence in a number of countries, including its biggest market, the UK, where the European rights to the brand are owned by Heineken International.
Foster's annual sales amount to around 500 megalitres worldwide, largely buoyed by UK sales, where it is the second highest selling beer after Carling. While known internationally as the quintessential Australian beer brand, Foster's is not as popular and relatively rare in Australia, particularly when compared to other CUB beers such as Victoria Bitter and Carlton Draught.
Foster's was created by two Irish-American brothers, William M. and Ralph R. Foster, who arrived in Melbourne from New York in 1886. The brothers began brewing Foster's Lager in November 1888. It was made available to the public from February 1889. The product was first exported in 1901, when bottles were sent to Australian combatants in the Boer War.
In 1907, the company merged with five other brewing companies to form Carlton & United Breweries (CUB). Then only available in bottles, Foster's Lager was considered to be CUB's premium brand.
In 1958, steel cans were introduced.
Foster's Lager was first imported into the UK in 1971. It was launched in the US in 1972.
Commencing 1981, the brand was brewed under licence in the UK by Watney Mann and Truman Brewers. This was the first time that Fosters had been available on draught anywhere in the world; in Australia it had only been available first in bottles, then later in cans. The draught product was based on Carlton Lager, another Carlton United Brewers product, and it was first brewed in the UK at the pilot brewery at Truman's Brick Lane Brewery in mid 1981. In 1986, Courage obtained the rights to brew and distribute Foster's alongside Watney Mann and Truman Brewers. This was a result of a deal done following Courage's acquisition by Carlton United Breweries in 1990, which by that time had been re-named as Foster's Brewing Group. In 1990, Courage took over Watney Mann and Truman Brewers following the pubs for breweries swap with WMTB's parent company Grand Met.
In 2011, CUB and its product lines, including Foster's, were bought by the South African and British conglomerate SABMiller, which in turn was incorporated into the multinational (Belgian, Brazilian, and American) Anheuser-Busch InBev in 2016. In 2019, Anheuser-Busch InBev agreed to sell CUB including Fosters to Asahi Breweries. The deal is expected to completed in 2020.
Advertising from the early 20th century claimed Foster's Lager was adjuncted with cane sugar. A number of breweries advertised a sugar content, (e.g. Bulimba), as it implied a lighter less bitter brew than was commonly sold. (Rice malt and very light barley malts replaced sugar, which can be troublesome for brewers.) Continuing a "tradition" started in the early 20th century, the water used in the production is sourced from the nearby Yarra River which contributes to the beer's unique taste.
The Tim Foster's yeast in use today was brought to Carlton in 1923 from Professor Jorgensen in Denmark.
The lager is hopped with selected oil extracts of Super Pride of Ringwood hops, which like any modern beer, is added after fermentation to minimise losses to the yeast sediment. The hop is sourced from the only two farms in Australia that grow it.
The product is 4% ABV in Europe, Australia and India, and 5% in the US.
The European rights to the beer are owned by Heineken International, who brews and distributes a 4% ABV Foster's in most European countries. In the United States and India, rights to the brand are owned by SABMiller. In Canada and Brazil, Foster's is brewed by Molson Canada and Brasil Kirin under licence from Foster's Brewing International.
In the UK, Foster's is produced by Heineken at the Royal Brewery in Manchester.
Production of the Australian regular brand recommenced in 2014, but it was only briefly promoted. It had been in continuous production from November 1888 to about 2002, making it the longest-lived beer label in Australia. Once a "premium" brand, Foster's Lager has been bypassed by the Foster's Group's favoured premium brands of Carlton Crown Lager and Stella Artois.
In Australia until the end of the 1970s, Foster's Lager was a reasonably popular bottled and canned beer with a somewhat premium image. Then in the early 1980s there were major changes in the Australian brewing industry, including the merger of Castlemaine (Brisbane), Swan (Perth) and Toohey's (Sydney) into a national brewing group, as a result of acquisitions by Perth entrepreneur Alan Bond.
Faced with inroads into its non-Victorian markets, Carlton and United Beverages (CUB) reviewed its product range and attempted to re-position some of its brands. Foster's Draught was introduced, served on tap alongside established draught brands such as Castlemaine XXXX and Toohey's Draught. Despite some initial success, bolstered by heavy advertising, the brand did not prove to be popular and was eventually withdrawn from sale.
The Foster's Group has tended to promote the brands of Carlton Draught (mainstream market) and Victoria Bitter (working class male market).
The CUB Yatala Road Brewery south of Brisbane, the site of the former Power's Brewery, brews all CUB mainstream and contract beers that are sold outside of Victoria. The Yatala Brewery is the largest in the Southern Hemisphere. CUB's original Abbotsford Brewery now only supplies Victoria and South Australia, although the CUB headquarters remains there.
In late 2014 Foster's enjoyed some renewed success in the Australian market, due to returning to wide-release sale in Australian liquor stores with some renewed nostalgic brand recognition. Foster's lager was marketed as "Foster's Classic" and sold in 375ml cans with 4.0% ABV. It continues to have improved sales in Australia.
In April 2006, Scottish & Newcastle plc announced that it had agreed to acquire the Foster's brand in Europe (including Turkey), the Russian Federation and other countries in the Commonwealth of Independent States for approximately £309 million. In August 2006, SABMiller, now owned by AB InBev, announced that it had bought back rights to the Foster's brand in India for a reported $120m from private investors.
An odd case emerged in 2015 when a New York consumer of Foster's Lager sued the brewer after - he claimed - discovering it was not brewed in Australia. He proposed a class action on the grounds of deceptive marketing. The suit cited advertising slogans such as 'Foster's Australian for Beer' and 'How to Speak Australian' were intended to trick consumers into believing the beer is made in Australia - which in turn meant the beer could be sold at a higher, premium price.
A number of companies own marketing rights to Foster's including Heineken International in Europe and CIS, MillerCoors in the U.S., Labatt in Canada and Brasil Kirin in Brazil.
Scottish & Newcastle launched Foster's Twist, a beer with a hint of citrus that is marketed as a refreshing alternative to other heavier beers and Premium Packaged Spirits such as Smirnoff Ice. Foster's Twist is 4.5% abv. It has since been withdrawn from the market.
There is also Foster's Super Chilled, which is served at a colder temperature and is available in pubs and bars.
In 2008, Foster's was introduced with a widget called a "scuba" placed into the can to ensure good mixing. This variant is only currently available in the UK.
In the UK, customers are also able to purchase a keg of Foster's for private parties, collecting and returning the keg at a participating store or public house.
Also, there is Fosters Gold which has a slightly higher alcohol percentage of 4.5% sold only in bottles.
From 1964, the brand was promoted in the UK by comedian Barry Humphries and his "Private Eye" character Barry McKenzie, a bumbling Foster's swilling Australian expatriate.
Foster's Lager used the slogan "The Amber Nectar" in Australia and the UK, and "Australian for Beer", elsewhere overseas. The overseas advertising of the product often focuses on the Australian connotations of the beer, e.g. with reference to stereotypical Australian imagery such as kangaroos, exaggerated accents, and cork hats. This was true of a campaign in the 1980s fronted by the Australian comedian Paul Hogan.
The 2009 campaign for Foster's contains two 40-second adverts, "Backpacker" and "Deep Sea"; both end with the slogan, "Foster's – get some Australian in you."
The Foster's Lager brand was used as an advertising sponsorship deal with Norwich City F.C. from 1986 to 1989 (a period which included two top five finishes and a run to the FA Cup semi-finals). At its commencement, the sponsorship by Foster's was the most lucrative sponsorship ever given to an English football club.
The brand sponsored Formula One events regularly from 1986 to 2006. During this period it was the title sponsor for the Australian GP (1986–1993 and 2002–2006), the British GP (1990–1993 and 2000–2006) and the San Marino GP (2003–2006). It also was the prime sponsor and trackside sponsor of many other Grands Prix during this time. The brand was also used in a sponsorship deal with the A1 Team Australia from 2005 to 2007.
The UK division of the Foster's brand has focused on cultivating comedy-centric advertising and sponsorship arrangements and on 9 November 2011 they launched a trailer for their sponsored, online-only version of the hit 90s' television show "The Fast Show". The six weekly episodes started on 10 November and featured the original cast (with the exception of Mark Williams) and many of the characters from the previous series.
From 2010 to 2015 Foster's adverts featured "Good call", in which numerous Britons phone up Australians Brad and Dan for general advice. The campaign was revived in 2019.

</doc>
<doc id="11315" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11315" title="Friends">
Friends

Friends is an American television sitcom, created by David Crane and Marta Kauffman, which aired on NBC from September 22, 1994, to May 6, 2004, lasting ten seasons. With an ensemble cast starring Jennifer Aniston, Courteney Cox, Lisa Kudrow, Matt LeBlanc, Matthew Perry and David Schwimmer, the show revolves around six friends in their 20s and 30s who live in Manhattan, New York City. The series was produced by Bright/Kauffman/Crane Productions, in association with Warner Bros. Television. The original executive producers were Kevin S. Bright, Kauffman, and Crane.
Kauffman and Crane began developing "Friends" under the title "Insomnia Cafe" between November and December 1993. They presented the idea to Bright, and together they pitched a seven-page treatment of the show to NBC. After several script rewrites and changes, including title changes to "Six of One" and "Friends Like Us", the series was finally named "Friends".
Filming took place at Warner Bros. Studios in Burbank, California. All ten seasons of "Friends" ranked within the top ten of the final television season ratings; it ultimately reached the number-one spot in its eighth season. The series finale aired on May 6, 2004, and was watched by around 52.5 million American viewers, making it the fifth most-watched series finale in television history, and the most-watched television episode of the 2000s.
"Friends" received acclaim throughout its run, becoming one of the most popular television shows of all time. The series was nominated for 62 Primetime Emmy Awards, winning the Outstanding Comedy Series award in 2002 for its eighth season. The show ranked no. 21 on "TV Guide"s 50 Greatest TV Shows of All Time, and no. 7 on "Empire" magazine's The 50 Greatest TV Shows of All Time. In 1997, the episode "The One with the Prom Video" was ranked 100 on "TV Guide"s 100 Greatest Episodes of All-Time. In 2013, "Friends" ranked no. 24 on the Writers Guild of America's 101 Best Written TV Series of All Time, and no. 28 on "TV Guide"s 60 Best TV Series of All Time.
Rachel Green, a sheltered but friendly woman, flees her wedding day and wealthy yet unfulfilling life, and finds childhood friend Monica Geller, a tightly wound but caring chef. After Rachel becomes a waitress at West Village coffee house Central Perk, she and Monica become roommates at Monica's apartment located above Central Perk, and Rachel joins Monica's group of single people in their mid-20s: Previous roommate Phoebe Buffay, an eccentric, innocent masseuse; neighbor Joey Tribbiani, a dim-witted yet loyal struggling actor and womanizer; Joey's roommate Chandler Bing, a sarcastic, self-deprecating IT manager; and her older brother and Chandler's college roommate Ross Geller, a sweet-natured but insecure paleontologist.
Episodes depict the friends' comedic and romantic adventures and career issues, such as Joey auditioning for roles or Rachel seeking jobs in the fashion industry. The six characters each have many dates and serious relationships, such as Monica with Richard Burke, and Ross with Emily Waltham. Ross and Rachel's intermittent relationship is the most often-recurring storyline; during the ten seasons of the show, they repeatedly date and break up. Ross briefly marries Emily, Ross and Rachel have a child together after a one-night stand, Chandler and Monica date and marry each other, and Phoebe marries Mike Hannigan. Other frequently recurring characters include Ross and Monica's parents Jack and Judy Geller from Long Island; Ross's ex-wife Carol Willick, their son Ben Geller, and Carol's lesbian partner Susan Bunch; Central Perk barista Gunther; Chandler's ex-girlfriend Janice Goralnik; and Phoebe's twin sister Ursula.
In their original contracts for the first season, cast members were paid $22,500 per episode. The cast members received different salaries in the second season, beginning from the $20,000 range to $40,000 per episode. Before their salary negotiations for the third season, the cast decided to enter collective negotiations, despite Warner Bros.' preference for individual deals. The actors were given the salary of the least paid cast member. The stars were paid $75,000 per episode in season three, $85,000 in season four, $100,000 in season five, $125,000 in season six, $750,000 in seasons seven and eight, and $1 million in seasons nine and ten, making Aniston, Cox, and Kudrow the highest-paid TV actresses of all time. The cast also received syndication royalties beginning in 2000 after renegotiations. At the time, that financial benefit of a piece of the show's lucrative back-end profits had only been given out to stars who had ownership rights in a show, like Jerry Seinfeld and Bill Cosby.
Series creator David Crane wanted all six actors to be equally prominent, and the series was lauded as being "the first true 'ensemble' show." The cast members made efforts to keep the ensemble format and not allow one member to dominate; they entered themselves in the same acting categories for awards, opted for collective salary negotiations, and asked to appear together on magazine cover photos in the first season. The cast members also became best friends off-screen, so much so that recurring guest star Tom Selleck reported that he sometimes felt left out.
The cast remained good friends after the series run, most notably Cox and Aniston, with Aniston being godmother to Cox and David Arquette's daughter, Coco. In the official farewell commemorative book "Friends 'Til the End", each separately acknowledged in interviews that the cast had become their family.
The first season introduces the six main characters who live in New York City: Rachel Green, a waitress; professional chef Monica Geller; her paleontologist brother, Ross Geller; free-spirited masseuse Phoebe Buffay; struggling actor Joey Tribbiani, and Ross's college friend, Chandler Bing, whose precise occupation at a corporation is unknown. Rachel arrives at Central Perk, wearing her wedding dress, after leaving her fiancé, Barry, an orthodontist, at the altar. She moves into her high school friend Monica's apartment, and gets a waitress job at Central Perk. Ross, who has had a crush on Rachel since high school, often attempts to declare his feelings for her. However, many obstacles stand in his way, including his insecurities, Rachel dating an Italian neighbour named Paolo, and the fact that he is expecting a baby with his lesbian ex-wife, Carol, who gives birth to Ben later in the season. Joey never has a steady girlfriend and constantly sleeps with a variety of women. Phoebe is rather quirky and eccentric, mostly due to her mother's suicide when Phoebe was a child and having lived on the streets for a time. However, the gang loves her regardless. Chandler breaks up with his girlfriend, Janice (Maggie Wheeler), only to find himself reconnecting with her throughout the series. Near the end of the season, while Ross is at a paleontology dig in China, Chandler accidentally lets slip that Ross loves Rachel, who then realizes that she also cares for him. The season ends with Rachel waiting at the airport for Ross, who is returning from China.
Rachel greets Ross at the airport only to discover that he has returned with Julie (Lauren Tom), someone he knew from graduate school. Rachel's attempts to tell Ross that she loves him initially mirror his failed attempts in the first season. After he breaks up with Julie for Rachel, friction between them develops when Rachel discovers Ross's list of the cons of dating her. They eventually begin a relationship after Rachel sees an old home video from her and Monica's prom night and realizes Ross was going to stand in for her prom date who nearly stood her up. Monica is promoted to head chef at the Iridium restaurant, then gets fired for accepting gifts from a supplier, which is against company policy. Needing money, she is forced to take an embarrassing job as a waitress at a 1950s-style diner. She also begins dating Richard Burke (Tom Selleck), a recently divorced family friend who is 21 years her senior. They eventually break up when Monica realizes that Richard, already a father, does not want more children. Joey is cast in a fictional version of the soap opera, "Days of Our Lives" as neurosurgeon Dr. Drake Ramoray. He moves out of his and Chandler's apartment, forcing Chandler to get a new roommate, Eddie (Adam Goldberg). However, Eddie is annoying and somewhat deranged. When Joey claims in a soap opera magazine interview that he writes many of his own lines, offending the show's writer, his character is killed off. No longer able to afford his expensive new apartment, Joey moves back in with Chandler, kicking Eddie out in the process. In the season finale, Chandler talks to an anonymous woman in an online chat room. When they agree to meet in person, the woman turns out to be Janice.
Season 3 takes on a significantly more serialized format. Chandler and Janice date for several episodes until Joey catches Janice kissing her soon-to-be ex-husband. Not wanting to destroy her family, Chandler urges Janice to go back to her husband, then becomes depressed over the breakup for several episodes. Rachel quits her job at Central Perk and begins working at Bloomingdale's, an upscale department store chain. Ross soon becomes jealous of her colleague Mark. Ross is frustrated by Rachel's long work hours. She is tired of his constant jealousy and insecurity and decides they need a relationship break. Ross, hurt and somewhat drunk, immediately sleeps with Chloe, "the hot girl from the Xerox place," causing Rachel to break up with him fully. Although Phoebe initially believes she has no family except her twin sister Ursula (Lisa Kudrow), she learns she has a half-brother, Frank Jr. (Giovanni Ribisi) and discovers her birth mother, Phoebe Abbott (Teri Garr) over the course of the season. Joey falls in love with his acting partner Kate (Dina Meyer), but is jealous of her dating the director of their play. They begin a brief relationship that ends when she takes an acting job in Los Angeles. Monica dates millionaire Pete Becker (Jon Favreau), despite her initially not being attracted to him. However, she breaks up with Pete after he is seriously hurt trying to become the Ultimate Fighting Champion and refuses to quit. Phoebe sets Ross up on a date with her friend, Bonnie (Christine Taylor), inciting Rachel's jealousy. She tries sabotaging the relationship by coercing Bonnie to shave her head bald, and eventually admits to Ross that she still has feelings for him. The season closes with Ross having to choose between Rachel and Bonnie.
In the season 4 premiere, after Ross breaks up with Bonnie, he and Rachel briefly reconcile after Ross pretends to read a long letter that Rachel wrote for him. However, Ross continues to insist that the two were on a break when he slept with Chloe, so they break up again. Joey dates Kathy (Paget Brewster), a girl that Chandler has a crush on. Kathy and Chandler later kiss, which causes drama between Chandler and Joey. Joey only forgives Chandler and allows him to date Kathy after Chandler spends Thanksgiving in a box as punishment. Chandler's relationship with Kathy ends after he discovers that she cheated on him due to an argument. Phoebe loses her job as a masseuse after making out with one of her clients and she accompanies Monica, who has become a caterer for hire. They soon start a catering business together but Monica, after negatively reviewing a restaurant, Allesandro's, is offered the position of head chef. Despite initially being pressured by the wrath of her co-workers, Monica eventually asserts her dominance in the kitchen. Phoebe becomes a surrogate mother for her brother and his wife, Alice (Debra Jo Rupp). Monica and Rachel are forced to switch apartments with Joey and Chandler after losing a bet during a quiz game, but manage to switch back by bribing them with Knicks season tickets and a one-minute kiss (off-screen) between each other. After her boss dies, Rachel is demoted to personal shopping and meets and later dates a customer named Joshua (Tate Donovan). Ross begins dating an English woman named Emily (Helen Baxendale), and they quickly get engaged. Rachel struggles to cope and hastily suggests to Joshua that they marry, after which he rejects her. In the season finale, the group, apart from Phoebe and Rachel, travel to Ross and Emily's wedding in London. Chandler and Monica sleep together, and Rachel, realizing that she is still in love with Ross, rushes to London to stop Ross and Emily's wedding, but changes her mind when she sees them happy together. While saying his vows, Ross says Rachel's name at the altar, shocking his bride and the guests.
Ross and Emily marry, but an angry and humiliated Emily flees the reception. Rachel soon admits her love for Ross, but realizing how ridiculous this is, advises him to work on his marriage to Emily. She develops a crush on her neighbour Danny and they date briefly, until she realizes that he is too close with his sister. Monica and Chandler try to keep their new relationship a secret from their friends. Phoebe gives birth to triplets in the show's 100th episode. She gives birth to a boy, Frank Jr. Jr., and two girls, Leslie and Chandler. After weeks of trying to contact her, Emily agrees to reconcile with Ross and move to New York if he breaks off all communication with Rachel. Ross agrees, but later attends a dinner with all his friends, Rachel included. Emily phones Ross, discovers Rachel is there, realizes she does not trust him and ends their marriage. Ross takes out his anger at work, resulting in him being indefinitely suspended from the museum, and he moves in with Chandler and Joey until eventually getting a new apartment across the street from them. Rachel gets a new job at Ralph Lauren. Phoebe begins a relationship with a police officer, Gary (Michael Rapaport), after finding his badge and using it as her own. Monica and Chandler go public with their relationship, to the surprise and delight of their friends. They decide to get married on a trip to Las Vegas, but change their plans after witnessing Ross and Rachel drunkenly stumbling out of the wedding chapel.
In the season 6 premiere, Ross and Rachel's marriage turns out to be a drunken mistake that neither remembers until the other friends mention it. Ross promises Rachel he will get them an annulment, then secretly does nothing because he cannot face having three failed marriages. By the time Rachel discovers they are still married, an annulment is impossible due to their history; they are forced to get a divorce. After ignoring the numerous signs that they should get married, Monica and Chandler decide to live together, forcing Rachel to move in with Phoebe. Joey gets a new roommate, Janine (Elle Macpherson). They develop feelings for each other and date briefly until Janine criticizes Monica and Chandler, ending the relationship. After Janine moves out, Joey struggles with paying his bills so he takes a job at Central Perk. He soon lands a role on a cable TV series called "Mac and C.H.E.E.S.E.", starring alongside a crime-fighting robot. Ross gets a teaching job at New York University. He dates Elizabeth (Alexandra Holden), a student, despite it being against university policy. Elizabeth's father, Paul (Bruce Willis), disapproves of Ross but falls for Rachel, and they start dating. Both relationships soon end: Elizabeth is too immature for Ross, and previously reserved Paul opens up emotionally and is more than Rachel can handle. Phoebe and Rachel's apartment catches fire, and Rachel moves in with Joey, while Phoebe stays with Chandler and Monica, though they later switch. While at a museum that has a two-year wait for weddings, Monica puts her name on the reservation list as a joke. When Chandler intercepts the museum's phone call about a cancellation, he panics; however, Chandler has been planning to propose while pretending he may never want to marry. While dining at a fancy restaurant, Chandler's planned proposal is subverted by Monica's ex-boyfriend Richard Burke, who unexpectedly shows up. Richard later tells Monica he wants to marry her and have children. Monica becomes upset at Chandler, believing his ruse about not wanting to marry. Chandler believes Monica has left him until he comes home to find their apartment decorated with candles and her waiting to propose to him. When she becomes too emotional to continue, Chandler proposes and she accepts.
The seventh season mainly follows Monica and Chandler as they plan their wedding amid various problems. Joey's television series, "Mac and C.H.E.E.S.E" is canceled, but he is offered his old role on "Days of Our Lives"; the show is retconned with the revelation that Dr. Drake Ramoray has been in a four-year coma and is revived with a brain transplant from another character. Phoebe's repaired apartment now has one large bedroom instead of the original two, so Rachel permanently stays at Joey's. Rachel is promoted at Ralph Lauren and impulsively hires a young assistant, Tag Jones (Eddie Cahill), based on his looks, passing over a more qualified woman. Tag discovers her feelings about him at Thanksgiving dinner, and they begin dating, hiding it from co-workers. However, on her 30th birthday, Rachel ends their relationship, realizing Tag is too young and immature, particularly if she intends to follow her marriage schedule. Hours before Monica and Chandler's wedding ceremony, Chandler panics and goes into hiding just as Phoebe and Rachel find a positive pregnancy test in Monica and Chandler's bathroom. They assume Monica is pregnant. Ross and Phoebe find Chandler and convince him to return for the ceremony, though he briefly bolts again after overhearing Phoebe and Rachel discussing the pregnancy test. He quickly returns, embracing the idea of fatherhood. After the ceremony, Monica denies she is pregnant; unbeknown to everyone, the positive pregnancy test is Rachel's.
Season 8 begins at Monica and Chandler's wedding reception. Phoebe and Monica discover Rachel's pregnancy and persuade her to take another test to confirm it. Phoebe initially claims the test is negative, badly disappointing Rachel, then reveals it is positive, saying Rachel now knows how she really feels about having a baby. Ross is eventually revealed to be the father, and the season revolves around Rachel's pregnancy. Rachel and Ross agree to be co-parents without resuming their romantic relationship; Ross begins dating Mona (Bonnie Somerville), who is Monica's co-worker from Allesandro's. Joey takes Rachel out to quell her fears about motherhood, and realizes he has romantic feelings for her. While suppressing his feelings, he encourages Rachel to stay at Ross's apartment so he can be involved in the pregnancy. The arrangement is too much for Mona, and she breaks up with Ross. Joey tells Ross about his feelings for Rachel. Ross initially is angry, then gives his blessing. Joey tells Rachel that he loves her, but she realizes she does not feel the same way, and they remain friends. When Rachel goes into labor, Ross's mother gives him a family heirloom ring and encourages him to propose to Rachel. Ross hesitates, and puts the ring in his jacket, which he later leaves in Rachel's room. After Monica jokes about having kids, she and Chandler decide to have a baby, starting while they are still at the hospital. After a prolonged labor, during which numerous other expectant mothers, including Janice, are taken to the delivery room, Rachel gives birth to baby Emma. She is left saddened and afraid after Janice later says that Ross may not always be there for her and the baby. When Joey comforts Rachel, the ring falls from Ross's jacket to the floor. Joey kneels to pick it up, and Rachel, believing he is proposing, impulsively says yes. Meanwhile, Ross intends to ask Rachel if she wants to resume their relationship.
Season nine begins with Ross and Rachel cohabitating with their daughter Emma, after Joey and Rachel clear up the proposal misunderstanding. Monica and Chandler run into obstacles as they try for a baby: Chandler unknowingly agrees to a work transfer to Tulsa just as Monica is offered a head chef job at a new restaurant, Javu, resulting in Chandler commuting back and forth. After being apart from Monica during Christmas, Chandler quits to pursue a new career in advertising, starting as an unpaid intern at an ad agency, and eventually being hired as a junior copywriter. Finally, Monica and Chandler discover they are physically incompatible to conceive and after considering multiple options, decide to adopt. Phoebe begins dating Mike Hannigan (Paul Rudd) for most of the season until Mike says that he never wants to marry again. Phoebe dates her ex-boyfriend from season 1, David (Hank Azaria) who plans on proposing to her, but Mike proposes first. Phoebe rejects both proposals but gets back together with Mike, only needing the reassurance that they have a future together. Rachel, believing that her co-worker Gavin (Dermot Mulroney) is trying to steal her job while she is on maternity leave, returns to Ralph Lauren early. She discovers at her birthday party that Gavin has feelings for her. They kiss but do not pursue a relationship due to her history with Ross. Meanwhile, Ross, having seen the kiss, retaliates by dating other women. After realizing that her and Ross's living situation is too weird, Rachel and Emma move in with Joey. Rachel develops a crush on him, only to be disheartened when he starts dating Charlie (Aisha Tyler), a new paleontology professor who Ross is attracted to. In the finale, the group travels to Barbados for Ross's keynote speech at a conference. Joey and Charlie break up upon realizing they have nothing in common. Joey then learns about Rachel's feelings for him, but says they cannot pursue this because of Ross. However, upon seeing Ross and Charlie kiss each other, he goes to Rachel's hotel room, and the finale ends with them kissing.
The tenth season brings several long-running story lines to a close. Joey and Rachel try to contend with Ross's feelings about their relationship, and after disastrous attempts to consummate, decide it is best they remain friends. Charlie breaks up with Ross to get back together with her ex-boyfriend. Mid-season, Joey officiates Phoebe and Mike's wedding outside the Central Perk coffee house after a snow storm paralyzes the city, preventing them and guests getting to the wedding venue. Monica and Chandler are chosen by a pregnant woman named Erica (Anna Faris) to adopt her baby. Following this, Monica and Chandler prepare to move to a house in the suburbs to raise their family, saddening everyone, particularly Joey, who is coping with all the changes in his life. In the series finale, Erica gives birth to fraternal twins, much to Monica and Chandler's surprise. Rachel is fired from Ralph Lauren after her boss overhears her interviewing for a job at Gucci. She encounters her former Bloomingdale co-worker Mark, who offers her a new job at Louis Vuitton in Paris. Ross, believing Rachel wants to stay, tries bribing Mr. Zelner to rehire her until he realizes Rachel wants to go to Paris. When Rachel says a tearful personal goodbye to everyone except Ross at her going away party, a hurt and angry Ross confronts Rachel, and they end up sleeping together. Rachel leaves, and Ross – realizing how much he loves Rachel – chases her to the airport. When he reaches her, Rachel says she has to go to Paris. Before the plane takes off, Rachel calls Ross's home phone and leaves a voice mail, apologizing for the way it ended. While speaking, she realizes that she loves him too, and gets off the plane at the last minute. The series ends with all the friends, plus Monica and Chandler's new babies, leaving the empty apartment together for a final cup of coffee at Central Perk. The show ends first with a shot of everyone's keys to Monica and Chandler's apartment left on the counter top, and then pans to a shot of the apartment's purple door.
David Crane and Marta Kauffman began developing three new television pilots that would premiere in 1994 after their sitcom "Family Album" was cancelled by CBS in 1993. Kauffman and Crane decided to pitch the series about "six people in their 20s making their way in Manhattan" to NBC since they thought it would fit best there. Crane and Kauffman presented the idea to their production partner Kevin Bright, who had served as executive producer on their HBO series "Dream On". The idea for the series was conceived when Crane and Kauffman began thinking about the time when they had finished college and started living by themselves in New York; Kauffman believed they were looking at a time when the future was "more of a question mark." They found the concept to be interesting, as they believed "everybody knows that feeling", and because it was also how they felt about their own lives at the time. The team titled the series "Insomnia Cafe" and pitched the idea as a seven-page treatment to NBC in December 1993.
At the same time, Warren Littlefield, the then-president of NBC Entertainment, was seeking a comedy involving young people living together and sharing expenses. Littlefield wanted the group to share memorable periods of their lives with friends, who had become "new, surrogate family members." However, Littlefield found difficulty in bringing the concept to life and found the scripts developed by NBC to be terrible. When Kauffman, Crane and Bright pitched "Insomnia Cafe", Littlefield was impressed that they knew who their characters were. NBC bought the idea as a put pilot, meaning they risked financial penalties if the pilot was not filmed. Kauffman and Crane took three days to write the pilot script for a show they titled "Friends Like Us." Littlefield wanted the series to "represent Generation X and explore a new kind of tribal bonding", but the rest disagreed. Crane argued that it was not a series for one generation, and wanted to produce a series that everyone would enjoy watching. NBC liked the script and ordered the series. They changed the title to "Six of One", mainly because they felt "Friends Like Us" was too similar to the ABC sitcom "These Friends of Mine".
Once it became apparent that the series was a favored project at NBC, Littlefield reported that he was getting calls from every agent in town, wanting their client to be a part of the series. Auditions for the lead roles took place in New York and Los Angeles. The casting director shortlisted 1,000 actors who had applied for each role down to 75. Those who received a callback read in front of Crane, Kauffman and Bright. At the end of March, the number of potential actors had been reduced to three or four for each part, and were asked to read for Les Moonves, then-president of Warner Bros. Television.
Having worked with David Schwimmer in the past, the series creators wrote the character of Ross with him in mind, and he was the first actor cast. Cox wanted to play the role of Monica because she liked the "strong" character, but the producers had her in mind to play Rachel because of her "cheery, upbeat energy", which was not how they envisioned Monica; after Cox's audition, though, Kauffman agreed with Cox, and she got the role. When Matt LeBlanc auditioned for Joey, he put a "different spin" on the character. He played Joey more simple-minded than intended and gave the character heart. Although Crane and Kauffman did not want LeBlanc for the role at the time, they were told by the network to cast him. Jennifer Aniston, Matthew Perry and Lisa Kudrow were cast based on their auditions.
More changes occurred to the series's storylines during the casting process. The writers found that they had to adjust the characters they had written to suit the actors, and the discovery process of the characters occurred throughout the first season. Kauffman acknowledged that Joey's character became "this whole new being", and that "it wasn't until we did the first Thanksgiving episode that we realized how much fun Monica's neuroses are."
In the weeks after NBC's pick up of "Friends", Crane, Kauffman and Bright reviewed sent-in scripts that writers had originally prepared for other series, mainly unproduced "Seinfeld" episodes. Kauffman and Crane hired a team of seven young writers because "When you're 40, you can't do it anymore. The networks and studios are looking for young people coming in out of college." The creators felt that using six equal characters, rather than emphasizing one or two, would allow for "myriad storylines and give the show legs." The majority of the storyline ideas came from the writers, although the actors added ideas. Although the writers originally planned the big love story to be between Joey and Monica, the idea of a romantic interest between Ross and Rachel emerged during the period when Kauffman and Crane wrote the pilot script.
During the production of the pilot, NBC requested that the script be changed to feature one dominant storyline and several minor ones, but the writers refused, wanting to keep three storylines of equal weight. NBC also wanted the writers to include an older character to balance out the young ones. Crane and Kauffman were forced to comply and wrote a draft of an early episode that featured "Pat the Cop." who would be used to provide advice to the other characters. Crane found the storyline to be terrible, and Kauffman joked, "You know the book, "Pat the Bunny"? We had Pat the Cop." NBC eventually relented and dropped the idea.
Each summer, the producers would outline the storylines for the subsequent season. Before an episode went into production, Kauffman and Crane would revise the script written by another writer, mainly if something concerning either the series or a character felt foreign. The hardest episodes to write were always "the first one and the last one of each season." Unlike other storylines, the idea for a relationship between Joey and Rachel was decided on halfway through the eighth season. The creators did not want Ross and Rachel to get back together so soon, and while looking for a romantic impediment, a writer suggested Joey's romantic interest in Rachel. The storyline was incorporated into the season; however, when the actors feared that the storyline would make their characters unlikable, the storyline was wrapped up, until it again resurfaced in the season's finale. For the ninth season, the writers were unsure about the amount of storyline to give to Rachel's baby, as they wanted the show neither to revolve around a baby nor pretend there to be none. Crane said that it took them a while to accept the idea of a tenth season, which they decided to do because they had enough stories left to tell to justify the season. Kauffman and Crane would not have signed on for an eleventh season, even if all the cast members had wanted to continue.
The episode title format—"The One ..."—was created when the producers realized that the episode titles would not be featured in the opening credits, and therefore would be unknown to most of the audience. Episode titles officially begin with "The One ..." except the title of the pilot episode and the series finale "The Last One."
The first season was shot on Stage 5 at Warner Bros. Studios in Burbank, California. NBC executives had worried that the coffee house setting was too hip and asked for the series to be set in a diner, but, eventually consented to the coffee house concept. The opening title sequence was filmed in a fountain at the Warner Bros. Ranch at 4:00 am, while it was particularly cold for a Burbank morning. At the beginning of the second season, production moved to the larger Stage 24, which was renamed "The Friends Stage" after the series finale. Filming for the series began during the summer of 1994 in front of a live audience, who were given a summary of the series to familiarize themselves with the six main characters; a hired comedian entertained the studio audience between takes. Each 22-minute episode took six hours to film—twice the length of most sitcom tapings—mainly due to the several retakes and rewrites of the script.
Although the producers always wanted to find the right stories to take advantage of being on location, "Friends" was never shot in New York. Bright felt that filming outside the studio made episodes less funny, even when shooting on the lot outside, and that the live audience was an integral part of the series. When the series was criticized for incorrectly depicting New York, with the financially struggling group of friends being able to afford huge apartments, Bright noted that the set had to be big enough for the cameras, lighting, and "for the audience to be able to see what's going on"; the apartments also needed to provide a place for the actors to execute the funny scripts. The fourth-season finale was shot on location in London because the producers were aware of the series's popularity in the UK. The scenes were shot in a studio with three audiences each made up of 500 people. These were the show's largest audiences throughout its run. The fifth-season finale, set in Las Vegas, was filmed at Warner Bros. Studios, although Bright met people who thought it was filmed on location.
The series's creators completed the first draft of the hour-long finale in January 2004, four months before its original airing. Crane, Kauffman and Bright watched the finales of other sitcoms to prepare the episode's outline, paying attention to what worked and what did not. They liked the ones that stayed true to the series, citing the finale of "The Mary Tyler Moore Show" as the gold standard. Crane, Kauffman, and Bright had difficulty writing the finale. They did not want to do "something high concept, or take the show out of the show." The most critical parts of the finale were shot without an audience, and with a minimum number of crew members. The main cast enjoyed the finale and were confident that the fans would react similarly:
NBC heavily promoted the series finale, which was preceded by weeks of media hype. Local NBC affiliates organized viewing parties around the U.S., including an event at Universal CityWalk featuring a special broadcast of the finale on an outdoor Astrovision screen. The finale was the subject of two episodes of "Dateline NBC", one of which ran for two hours. A one-hour retrospective of clips from previous episodes was shown before to the airing of the episode. Following the finale, "The Tonight Show with Jay Leno" was filmed on the set of the "Friends"' Central Perk coffee house, which featured the series's cast as guests. The advertising rates for the finale averaged $2 million for 30 seconds of commercial time, breaking the record held by the "Seinfeld" finale at $1.7 million.
In the U.S., 52.5 million viewers watched the finale on May 6, 2004, making it the most-watched entertainment telecast since the "Seinfeld" finale in 1998. Although not the most-watched episode of the series, the finale was the fourth most-watched series finale in television history, only behind the finales of "M*A*S*H", "Cheers" and "Seinfeld", which were respectively watched by 105, 80.4 and 76.2 million viewers. The retrospective episode was watched by fewer than 36 million viewers, and the finale was the second most-watched television broadcast of the year in the United States, only behind the Super Bowl. Following the finales of "Friends" and "Frasier", media critics speculated about the fate of the sitcom genre. Expressed opinions varied between a signalling of the end of the sitcom genre, a small decline in the large history of the genre, and a general reduction of scripted television in favor of reality shows.
Early reviews of the series were mixed; the first season holds a Metacritic score of 59 out of 100, based on 20 sampled reviews, indicating "mixed to average reviews." Tom Feran of "The Plain Dealer" wrote that the series traded "vaguely and less successfully on the hanging-out style of "Seinfeld"", while Ann Hodges of the "Houston Chronicle" called it "the new "Seinfeld" wannabe, but it will never be as funny as "Seinfeld"." In the "Los Angeles Daily News", Ray Richmond named the series as "one of the brighter comedies of the new season", and the "Los Angeles Times" called it "flat-out the best comedy series of the new season."
The "Chicago Sun-Times" Ginny Holbert found Joey and Rachel's characteristics to be underdeveloped, while Richmond commended the cast as a "likeable, youth ensemble" with "good chemistry." Robert Bianco of "USA Today" was complimentary of Schwimmer, calling him "terrific." He also praised the female leads, but was concerned that Perry's role as Chandler was "undefined" and that LeBlanc was "relying too much on the same brain-dead stud routine that was already tired the last two times he tried it." The authors of "Friends Like Us: The Unofficial Guide to Friends" thought that the cast was "trying just a little too hard", in particular, Perry and Schwimmer.
As the series progressed, reviews became more positive, and "Friends" became one of the most popular sitcoms of its time. It is now often ranked among the all-time best TV shows. Critics commended the series for having consistently sharp writing and for the chemistry between the main actors. Noel Holston of "Newsday", who had dismissed the pilot as a "so-so "Seinfeld" wannabe" in 1994, repudiated his earlier review after rewatching the episode and felt like writing an apology to the writers. Heather Havrilesky of Salon.com thought that the series "hit its stride" in the second season. Havrilesky found the character-specific jokes and situations "could reliably make you laugh out loud a few times each episode", and the quality of writing allowed the stories to be "original and innovative." Bill Carter of "The New York Times" called the eighth season a "truly stunning comeback." Carter found that by "generating new hot storylines and high-decibel laughs", the series made its way "back into the hearts of its fans." However, Liane Bonin of "Entertainment Weekly" felt that the direction of the ninth season was a "disappointing buzzkill", criticizing it for the non-stop celebrity guest spots and going into jump the shark territory. Although disappointed with the season, Bonin noted that "the writing [was] still sharp." Havrilesky thought that the tenth season was "alarmingly awful, far worse than you would ever imagine a show that was once so good could be." "Friends" was featured on "Time"s list of "The 100 Best TV Shows of All-Time", saying, "the well-hidden secret of this show was that it called itself "Friends", and was really about family."
Reviews of the series finale were mixed. "USA Today"s Robert Bianco described the finale as entertaining and satisfying and praised it for deftly mixing emotion and humor while highlighting each of the stars. Sarah Rodman of the "Boston Herald" praised Aniston and Schwimmer for their acting, but felt that their characters' reunion was "a bit too neat, even if it was what most of the show's legions of fans wanted." Roger Catlin of the "Hartford Courant" felt that newcomers to the series would be "surprised at how laughless the affair could be, and how nearly every strained gag depends on the sheer stupidity of its characters." Ken Parish Perkins, writing for "Fort Worth Star-Telegram", pointed out that the finale was "more touching than comical, more satisfying in terms of closure than knee-slappingly funny."
To maintain the series's ensemble format, the main cast members decided to enter themselves in the same acting categories for awards. Beginning with the series's eighth season, the actors decided to submit themselves in the lead actor balloting, rather than in the supporting actor fields. The series was nominated for 62 Primetime Emmy Awards, winning six. Aniston and Kudrow are the only main cast members to win an Emmy, while Cox is the only actor not to be nominated. The series won the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Comedy Series in 2002, receiving nominations in 1995, 1996, 1999, 2000, and 2003. The series also won an American Comedy Award, one GLAAD Media Award, one Golden Globe Award, three Logie Awards, six People's Choice Awards, one Satellite Award, and one Screen Actors Guild Award.
The table below shows the ratings of "Friends" in the United States, where it consistently ranked within the top ten of the final television season ratings. "Rank" refers to how well "Friends" rated compared to other television series that aired during primetime hours of the corresponding television season. It is shown in relation to the total number of series airing on the then-six major English-language networks in a given season. "Viewers" refers to the average number of viewers for all original episodes, broadcast during the television season in the series's regular timeslot. The "season premiere" is the date that the first episode of the season aired, and the "season finale" is the date that the final episode of the season aired. So far, "Friends" has been the last sitcom to reach the 1 spot on television, as its successors were "", "American Idol", "NBC Sunday Night Football", and "NCIS". Following the September 11 attacks, ratings increased 17% over the previous season.
Because of syndication revenue, "Friends" continues to generate approximately $1 billion each year for Warner Bros. That translates into about $20 million in annual residuals each for Jennifer Aniston, Courteney Cox, Lisa Kudrow, Matt LeBlanc, Matthew Perry and David Schwimmer, who each get 2% of syndication income for "Friends".
All episodes became available on Netflix on January 1, 2015, introducing teenagers to the show. UK "Friends" reruns' ratings in 2015 increased by more than 10% annually. reruns' US weekly audience, not including streaming, of 16 million would make it a hit on network television were the show still being produced. In the US the series has a syndication deal through multiple networks including Nick at Nite, TBS, and it also aired on Paramount Network through 2019. However, in July 2019, it was announced that from the beginning of 2020, "Friends" would not be available on Netflix in the US and instead would be shown on WarnerMedia's video-streaming service, HBO Max which launched on May 27, 2020.
Although the producers thought of "Friends" as "only a TV show", psychologists investigated the cultural impact of "Friends" during the series's run. Aniston's hairstyle was nicknamed "The Rachel" and copied around the world. Joey's catchphrase, "How "you" doin'?", became a popular part of Western English slang, often used as a pick-up line or when greeting friends. The series also influenced the English language, according to a study by the University of Toronto that found that the characters used the emphasized word "so" to modify adjectives more often than any other intensifier. Although the preference had already made its way into the American vernacular, usage on the series may have accelerated the change. Chandler's habit of ending a sentence unfinished for sarcasm also influenced viewers' speech.
"Friends" has also been credited in helping non-English speaking students to learn the language. A 2012 poll by Kaplan International English Colleges found that more than a quarter (26%) of its students cited the sitcom as the best show for helping them improve their English. Notable individuals who have also said that the sitcom helped them learn English include Liverpool F.C. manager Jürgen Klopp, BTS member RM and Belgian professional golfer Thomas Pieters.
"Friends" is parodied in the twelfth season "Murder, She Wrote" episode "Murder Among Friends." In the episode, amateur sleuth Jessica Fletcher (Angela Lansbury) investigates the murder of a writer for "Buds", a fictional television series about the daily lives of a group of city friends. The episode was devised after CBS moved "Murder, She Wrote" from its regular Sunday night timeslot to a Thursday night timeslot directly opposite "Friends" on NBC; Angela Lansbury was quoted by Bruce Lansbury, her brother and "Murder, She Wrote"s supervising producer, as having "a bit of an attitude" about the move to Thursday, but he saw the plot as "a friendly setup, no mean-spiritedness." Jerry Ludwig, the writer of the episode, researched the "flavor" of "Buds" by watching episodes of "Friends".
The Central Perk coffee house, one of the principal settings of the series, is part of the Warner Bros. Studio Tour Hollywood. People sometimes propose marriage on the couch, and many tourists cry when they sit on it. The coffee house has inspired various imitations worldwide. In 2006, Iranian businessman Mojtaba Asadian started a Central Perk franchise, registering the name in 32 countries. The decor of the coffee houses is inspired by "Friends", featuring replica couches, counters, neon signage and bricks. The coffee houses also contain paintings of the various characters from the series, and televisions playing "Friends" episodes. James Michael Tyler, who plays the Central Perk manager in the series, Gunther, attended the grand opening of the Dubai café, where he worked as a waiter. Central Perk was rebuilt as part of a museum exhibit at Warner Bros. Studios and was shown on "The Ellen DeGeneres Show" in October 2008.
Jennifer Aniston visited the set for the first time since the series finale in 2004. From September 24 to October 7, 2009, a Central Perk replica was based at Broadwick Street, Soho, London. The coffee house sold real coffee to customers and featured a display of "Friends" memorabilia and props, such as the Geller Cup from the season three episode "The One with the Football." In Beijing, business owner Du Xin opened a coffee shop named Central Perk in March 2010.
In India, there are six "Friends"-themed cafes, located in Chandigarh (named Central Perk); Kolkata; and West Bengal (named F.R.I.E.N.D.S. Cafe), which features many icons from the original T.V. series, including Chandler and Joey's ugly dog statue, the orange sofa, the purple door of Monica and Rachel's apartment, and Phoebe's pink bicycle. The other three cafes are located in Delhi, Gurgaon; Bhubaneswar, Odisha; and Pune, Maharashtra. There are two "Friends" themed cafes in Pakistan as wellone in Lahore, Punjab known as "Friends Cafe" and the other in Peshawar, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa called "Central Perk". Both of those cafes have an iconic couch, a guitar and foosball table, quotes from the show on the walls and even episode reruns on a projector. They're also planning to have their own Gunther at the bar. In 2016, a Central Perk replica was opened in Outram, Singapore. It is the only Central Perk that has been given the intellectual property rights by Warner Bros. outside of the United States. The café also includes feature walls, replicating the walls of the main characters' apartments and memorabilia and props used on the show. In August 2019, it was announced that a Central Perk Lego set would be launched to mark the show's 25 anniversary.
"Friends" has also developed an alternative family lifestyle by representing young people that live unconventional domestic lives. It presents the idea that "all you need is good friends" and can construct families through choice. The audience is able to identify with the program through the troubles seen on weekly episodes. It portrays a new way of living life and developing relationships which are not normally seen in conventional society. According to a pop-culture expert at the University at Buffalo, "Friends" is "one of those rare shows that marked a change in American culture." The images of youth and the roles they portray are better defined and represent a lifestyle that centres around creating and sustaining relationships between friends running their own lives and seeking help from each other.
"Vox" stated that "Friends" impacted the creation of other conflictless "hangout sitcoms", with groups of adult friends who are funny and have similar character traits. One example of this is "How I Met Your Mother", which "The Guardian"s TV and radio blog notes also shares its setting with "Friends", Manhattan. Other examples include "The Big Bang Theory", "New Girl", and "Happy Endings".
Readers of "TV Guide" voted the cast of "Friends" their Best Comedy cast of all time, ranking at 29% of the votes, beating "Seinfeld", which registered 18%. A poll undertaken by "60 Minutes" and "Vanity Fair" named "Friends" the third greatest sitcom of all time. In 2014, the series was ranked by "Mundo Estranho" the Best TV Series of All Time. A 2015 survey by "The Hollywood Reporter" of 2,800 actors, producers, directors, and other industry people named "Friends" as their No. 1 favorite show.
On November 12, 2019, "The Hollywood Reporter" announced that Warner Bros TV is developing a Friends reunion for HBO Max that would feature the whole cast and creators returning. On February 21, 2020, HBO confirmed that the unscripted reunion special, tentatively named "The One Where They Got Back Together", was set to be released in May the same year, along with the 236 original episodes of the series. On March 18, 2020, it was announced that the special, which was set to film on the "Friends" stage on March 23 and 24, had been postponed indefinitely, due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
After the produced pilot lived up to NBC's hopes, the series premiered with the name "Friends" on September 22, 1994, in the coveted Thursday 8:30 p.m. time slot. The pilot aired between "Mad About You" and "Seinfeld", and was watched by almost 22 million American viewers. The series was a huge success throughout its run and was a staple of NBC's Thursday night line-up, dubbed by the network as Must See TV. When Crane told reporters in 2001 that the ninth season was a possibility, critics believed that he was posturing and that at least two of the cast members would not sign on for another season. When it was confirmed that "Friends" would return for a ninth season, the news was mainly about the amount of money—$7 million per episode—that it took to bring the series back for another season.
After year-long expectations that the ninth season would be the series's last, NBC signed a deal in late December 2002 to bring the series back for a final tenth season. The series's creative team did not want to extend negotiations into the next year and wanted to start writing the rest of the ninth-season episodes and a potential series finale. NBC agreed to pay $10 million to Warner Bros. for the production of each tenth-season episode, the highest price in television history for a 30-minute series. Although NBC was unable to bring in enough advertising revenue from commercials to cover the costs, the series was integral to the Thursday night schedule, which brought high ratings and profits to the other television series. The cast demanded that the tenth season be reduced from the usual 24 episodes to 18 episodes to allow them to work on outside projects.
In fall 2001, Warner Bros. Domestic Cable made a deal with sister network TBS (both are owned by Time Warner) to air the series in rerun syndication. Warner Bros. Domestic Cable announced that it had sold additional cable rights to "Friends" to Nick at Nite which began airing in the fall of 2011 (unlike the TBS and broadcast syndication airings, Nick at Nite broadcasts of the series, which began airing as part of a seven-night launch marathon on September 5, 2011, replace the end credit tag scenes with marginalized credits featuring promotions for the series and other Nick at Nite programs). Warner Bros. was expected to make $200 million in license fees and advertising from the deal. Nick at Nite paid $500,000 per episode to air the episodes after 6 pm. ET for six years through fall 2017. In syndication until 2005, "Friends" had earned $4 million per episode in cash license fees for a total of $944 million.
Comedy Central began airing reruns of "Friends" on October 12, 2019.
Having already made huge success in the United States, "Friends" producers decided to air the show in Europe. It premiered in the UK on April 28, 1995, with Season 1 broadcasting until September on Channel 4 at 9:30 PM on Friday nights, and immediately was a success. The popularity of the show even allowed the theme song by the Rembrandts to hit number 3 in the UK Singles Charts in September 1995. The popularity of the show in Britain also led to an episode being produced in London at the end of the fourth season, starring a British actress, Helen Baxendale who became a leading character in seasons four and five during her relationship with Ross. The show has since aired on different channels in the UK in their original, unedited international versions prior to their being re-edited for US broadcast and syndication. These versions, with additional footage not seen domestically, have aired on such stations as Channel 4, Sky1, E4, and Comedy Central UK. On September 4, 2011, "Friends" officially ended on E4 after the channel re-ran the series since 2004. Comedy Central took over the rights to air the program from October 2011. Since 2018 Channel 5 started airing the program. In the Republic of Ireland, each season of the show made its European debut on RTÉ2. After 2004 RTÉ2 began to repeat the series from the start before moving over to TV3 and its digital channel 3e in 2010. , repeats of the show have returned to RTÉ2 while also broadcasting on Comedy Central Ireland.
Series 10's finale in the UK, broadcast on May 28, 2004, was on Channel 4. It was broadcast from 9 pm to 10 pm and attracted "Friends"' largest UK audiences. It attracted almost 10 million viewers, and is currently standing at Number 10 in Channel 4's most-watched shows. "Big Brother" was moved to 10 pm, which "Friends" had beaten. "Friends" got 9.6 million viewers at 9 pm, while "Big Brother 5"s launch attracted 7.2 million viewers at 10 pm, which is the most-watched premiere on UK TV ever. However, on January 3, 2007, "Celebrity Big Brother 5"s launch was watched by 7.3 million viewers, and its eviction on January 19, 2007, was watched by 8.7 million viewers.
"Friends" has aired in Australia on the Seven Network (season 1 only), Nine Network (season 2–10), Network Ten (2007–09, repeats), on GEM (a sub-channel of the Nine Network), and on pay TV channel TV Hits formerly aired on Arena, 111 Hits. The show is broadcast on TV2 in New Zealand.
In Canada, the series was broadcast on Global. In later years, it was syndicated on several of its cable sibling networks, including Slice, DTour, and TVTropolis, its previous incarnation.
In India, the show is broadcast by Comedy Central at various times. It is the most-watched English language show in the country.
In the Philippines, the show was originally aired on ABC-5 from 1996 to 2005 and ETC from 2005 to 2014.
In Greece, the show was broadcast on Star Channel. In Cyprus, "Friends" aired on CyBC 2 while reruns air on TVOne.
Beginning on March 5, 2012, high definition versions of all 236 "Friends" episodes were made available to local broadcast stations, starting with the pilot episode. For the remastered episodes, Warner Bros. restored previously cropped images on the left and right sides of the screen, using the original 35 mm film source, to use the entire widescreen frame. However, because the show was not originally filmed for widescreen, but rather filmed in 4-perf format and protected for 4:3, some cropping problems arise in some shots where information from the top and bottom of the frame is removed, and some expanded shots reveal unintentional artifacts, including set edges, boom mics and body doubles replacing some of the main cast. In early versions of the HD remasters, there were also a few shots, including chroma effects shots, which were sourced from standard-definition 480i videotape sources, as not all of the footage had been located in time for the remaster; the original film sources for these shots were later rescanned for later broadcast and release. These masters had been airing in New Zealand on TV2 since January 2011 and the earlier HD prints continue to air on Comedy Central in the UK as of 2020. Netflix added all ten seasons of "Friends" in high definition to their streaming service in the United States on January 1, 2015.
In October 2014, Warner Bros. chairman and chief executive officer, Kevin Tsujihara, announced that the company had licensed the North American streaming rights of all ten seasons of "Friends" to Netflix, in a deal said to be worth around $500,000 an episode, or about $120 million in total. The show became available on Netflix from January 1, 2015. The Netflix airings are the versions aired on NBC rather than the longer international versions, as discussed below. The series left Netflix in the US on January 1, 2020, as it began streaming on HBO Max on May 27, 2020.
All ten seasons have been released on DVD individually and as a box set. Each Region 1 season release contains special features and are presented in their aforementioned original international broadcast versions, although Region 2 releases are as originally aired domestically. For the first season, each episode is updated with color correction and sound enhancement. A wide range of "Friends" merchandise has been produced by various companies. In September 1995, WEA Records released the first album of music from "Friends", the "Friends Original TV Soundtrack", containing music featured in previous and future episodes. The soundtrack debuted on the "Billboard" 200 at number 46, and sold 500,000 copies in November 1995. In 1999, a second soundtrack album entitled "Friends Again" was released. Other merchandise includes a "Friends" version of the DVD game "Scene It?", and a quiz video game for PlayStation 2 and PC entitled "Friends: The One with All the Trivia". On September 28, 2009, a box set was released in the UK celebrating the series's 15th anniversary. The box set contained extended episodes, an episode guide, and original special features.
Warner Home Video released a complete series collection on Blu-ray on November 13, 2012. The collection does not feature the extra deleted scenes and jokes that were included on prior DVD releases, and are therefore presented in their NBC broadcast versions.
In Australia, the original released DVDs were released were fold out box sets which contained three discs and released as follows: Season 1 and Season 2 on March 13, 2002, Season 3 and Season 4 on July 9, 2002, Season 5, 6 and 7 on July 29, 2002, Season 8 on March 18, 2003, Season 9 on February 11, 2004, and Season 10 on November 24, 2004. Repackaged sets, slimmed into regular DVD cases also containing three discs were released from 2003 to 2004. Collector's Edition sets were released from September 9, 2003, through to February 1, 2006, these sets contains 4 discs, in fat DVD cases, with extra bonus material. On October 4, 2006, the individual seasons were repackaged into regular DVD case sets and marked as "Including Brand New Bonus Disc". Once again each individual season were repackaged with new artwork on March 31, 2010. The first complete series boxset on DVD was released around 2004 or 2005, this was titled 'The One With All Ten Seasons" and the packaging was a black box with a lift up lid and contains exclusive packaging for all ten seasons. The second complete series boxset was released August 21, 2013 and was a red box which contained the 2010 individual season sets inside. On October 1, 2014 was the 20th Anniversary boxset, this was a white box and contained the same 2010 individual releases inside. On October 7, 2015, another boxset was released 'The One With All Ten Seasons", the same name used on the original boxset, however this time slimmed down and contains the 2010 individual releases inside. The outer box is open on insert side for the cases to slide in and out, more of a budget release. In 2016, a repackaged 'The Complete Series' Blu-Ray boxset was issued, contenting the same 10 individual season in the original set, however the box is more cut down and is opened on one side, and also does not include the book that contained the episode guide.
After the series finale in 2004, LeBlanc signed on for the spin-off series, "Joey", following Joey's move to Los Angeles to pursue his acting career. Kauffman and Crane were not interested in the spin-off, although Bright agreed to executive produce the series with Scott Silveri and Shana Goldberg-Meehan. NBC heavily promoted "Joey" and gave it "Friends"' Thursday 8:00 pm timeslot. The pilot was watched by 18.6 million American viewers, but ratings continually decreased throughout the series's two seasons, averaging 10.2 million viewers in the first season and 7.1 million in the second. The final broadcast episode on March 7, 2006, was watched by 7.09 million viewers; NBC cancelled the series on May 15, 2006, after two seasons, leaving eight episodes unaired. Bright blamed the collaboration between NBC executives, the studio and other producers for quickly ruining the series:
Articles concerning the cultural influence of the program:

</doc>
<doc id="11317" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11317" title="Frankish">
Frankish

Frankish may refer to:

</doc>
<doc id="11318" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11318" title="FBI Most Wanted Terrorists">
FBI Most Wanted Terrorists

The FBI Most Wanted Terrorists is a list created and first released on October 10, 2001, with the authority of United States President Bush, following the September 11 attacks on the United States. Initially, the list contained 22 of the top suspected terrorists chosen by the FBI, all of whom had earlier been indicted for acts of terrorism between 1985 and 1998. None of the 22 had been captured by US or other authorities by that date. Of the 22, only Osama Bin Laden was by then already listed on the FBI Ten Most Wanted Fugitives list.
No particular legal consequences flowed from the creation of and inclusion on the list. On January 17, 2002, the FBI released a third major FBI wanted list, which has now become known as the FBI Seeking Information – War on Terrorism list, to enlist the public's help in reporting information which may prevent future terrorist attacks. The information sought to be reported is not necessarily relating to any person on any of the FBI wanted lists. 
On the fugitive group wanted poster, the FBI did not list the persons in any particular stated order, except perhaps for the consistent placing of bin Laden in the number one position of the top row. However, the 22 can easily fit into distinct categories over the two decades, based on the terrorist attacks in which they were, according to US authorities, involved.
For organization and ease of reference here, the relevant major terrorist attacks are listed by date below, with a brief summary for each, identifying the terror cells most directly responsible for the attack. The 22 on the list are then grouped beneath the attack for which each person was first accused of involvement.
Whereas the Most Wanted Terrorists list is reserved for terrorist fugitives who have been indicted by federal grand juries, the FBI recognized a further need to achieve a much quicker response time in order to prevent any future attacks which may be in the current planning stages. To enlist the public's help in this effort, the FBI sought a way to deliver the early known suspected terror attack information, often very limited, out to the public as quickly as possible. So, on January 17, 2002, the third major FBI wanted list was first released, which has now become known as the FBI Seeking Information – Terrorism list.
As the name of this list implies, the FBI's intent is to acquire any critical information from the public, as soon as possible, about the suspected terrorists, who may be in the planning stages of terror attacks against United States nationals at home and abroad. The first such list profiled five persons about whom little was known, but who were suspected of plotting terrorist attacks in martyrdom operations. The main evidence against the five was five videos they had produced, found in the rubble of Mohammed Atef's destroyed home outside Kabul, Afghanistan.
By 2006, more than four years had passed since the FBI had listed the original 22 alleged terrorists on the Most Wanted Terrorist list. Of those 22, by then four had been qualified for removal from the list, due to death or capture. Also by then, the FBI determined that new persons qualified to be listed as Most Wanted Terrorists. Some of these persons were indicted for attacks and plots that had taken place since the original list had been compiled. The original indictments had been for incidents only through 1998. Since then, the U.S. had become victim to at least two major terror attacks, which would generate some of the new indictments for the Most Wanted Terrorists, notably:
In addition, after the original 2001 list had been compiled and released to the public, the U.S. had foiled and issued indictments for numerous other plots, involving some new listed Most Wanted Terrorists. Those notable other plots involved:
In February 2006, the FBI completed two groups of additions to the Most Wanted Terrorists list, the first such additions in over four years. On February 24, 2006, the day after adding two name to the list, the FBI added an additional six fugitive terrorists, for various plots and attacks. One of the entries was for an indictment dating back to the June 14, 1985, hijacking of TWA flight 847 by Hezbollah (see above).
Additionally, the FBI also added to the Seeking Information – War on Terrorism list an additional three persons, most notably, Abu Musab al-Zarqawi, the notorious leader of Al-Qaeda in Iraq. This marked the first time that al-Zarqawi had appeared on any of the three major FBI wanted lists. On June 8, 2006, ABC News reported that Abu Musab al-Zarqawi was confirmed to have been killed in Baghdad in a bombing raid by a United States task force. His death was confirmed by multiple sources in Iraq, including the United States government.
Since 1984, the United States government has also used the Rewards for Justice Program, which pays monetary rewards of up to $5 million, or now, in some cases more, upon special authorization by the United States Secretary of State, to individuals who provide information which substantially leads to countering of terrorist attacks against United States persons. More than $100 million had been paid to over 60 people through this program.
The Rewards for Justice Program was established by the 1984 Act to Combat International Terrorism, Public Law 98-533, and is administered by the Bureau of Diplomatic Security, within the U.S. Department of State.

</doc>
<doc id="11319" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11319" title="Francis Bacon">
Francis Bacon

Francis Bacon, 1st Viscount St Alban, (; 22 January 15619 April 1626), also known as Lord Verulam, was an English philosopher and statesman who served as Attorney General and as Lord Chancellor of England. His works are credited with developing the scientific method and remained influential through the scientific revolution.
Bacon has been called the father of empiricism. His works argued for the possibility of scientific knowledge based only upon inductive reasoning and careful observation of events in nature. Most importantly, he argued science could be achieved by use of a sceptical and methodical approach whereby scientists aim to avoid misleading themselves. Although his most specific proposals about such a method, the "Baconian method", did not have a long-lasting influence, the general idea of the importance and possibility of a sceptical methodology makes Bacon the father of the scientific method. This method was a new rhetorical and theoretical framework for science, the practical details of which are still central in debates about science and methodology.
Francis Bacon was a patron of libraries and developed a functional system for the cataloguing of books by dividing them into three categories—history, poetry, and philosophy—which could further be divided into more specific subjects and subheadings. Bacon was educated at Trinity College, Cambridge, where he rigorously followed the medieval curriculum, largely in Latin.
Bacon was the first recipient of the Queen's counsel designation, which was conferred in 1597 when Elizabeth I of England reserved Bacon as her legal advisor. After the accession of James VI and I in 1603, Bacon was knighted. He was later created Baron Verulam in 1618 and Viscount St. Alban in 1621.
Because he had no heirs, both titles became extinct upon his death in 1626, at 65 years. Bacon died of pneumonia, with one account by John Aubrey stating that he had contracted the condition while studying the effects of freezing on the preservation of meat. He is buried at St Michael's Church, St Albans, Hertfordshire.
Francis Bacon was born on 22 January 1561 at York House near the Strand in London, the son of Sir Nicholas Bacon (Lord Keeper of the Great Seal) by his second wife, Anne (Cooke) Bacon, the daughter of the noted Renaissance humanist Anthony Cooke. His mother's sister was married to William Cecil, 1st Baron Burghley, making Burghley Bacon's uncle.
Biographers believe that Bacon was educated at home in his early years owing to poor health, which would plague him throughout his life. He received tuition from John Walsall, a graduate of Oxford with a strong leaning toward Puritanism. He went up to Trinity College at the University of Cambridge on 5 April 1573 at the age of 12, living for three years there, together with his older brother Anthony Bacon under the personal tutelage of Dr John Whitgift, future Archbishop of Canterbury. Bacon's education was conducted largely in Latin and followed the medieval curriculum. It was at Cambridge that Bacon first met Queen Elizabeth, who was impressed by his precocious intellect, and was accustomed to calling him "The young lord keeper".
His studies brought him to the belief that the methods and results of science as then practised were erroneous. His reverence for Aristotle conflicted with his rejection of Aristotelian philosophy, which seemed to him barren, disputatious and wrong in its objectives.
On 27 June 1576, he and Anthony entered "de societate magistrorum" at Gray's Inn. A few months later, Francis went abroad with Sir Amias Paulet, the English ambassador at Paris, while Anthony continued his studies at home. The state of government and society in France under Henry III afforded him valuable political instruction. For the next three years he visited Blois, Poitiers, Tours, Italy, and Spain. There is no evidence that he studied at the University of Poitiers. During his travels, Bacon studied language, statecraft, and civil law while performing routine diplomatic tasks. On at least one occasion he delivered diplomatic letters to England for Walsingham, Burghley, and Leicester, as well as for the queen.
The sudden death of his father in February 1579 prompted Bacon to return to England. Sir Nicholas had laid up a considerable sum of money to purchase an estate for his youngest son, but he died before doing so, and Francis was left with only a fifth of that money. Having borrowed money, Bacon got into debt. To support himself, he took up his residence in law at Gray's Inn in 1579, his income being supplemented by a grant from his mother Lady Anne of the manor of Marks near Romford in Essex, which generated a rent of £46.
Bacon stated that he had three goals: to uncover truth, to serve his country, and to serve his church. He sought to further these ends by seeking a prestigious post. In 1580, through his uncle, Lord Burghley, he applied for a post at court that might enable him to pursue a life of learning, but his application failed. For two years he worked quietly at Gray's Inn, until he was admitted as an outer barrister in 1582.
His parliamentary career began when he was elected MP for Bossiney, Cornwall, in a by-election in 1581. In 1584 he took his seat in Parliament for Melcombe in Dorset, and in 1586 for Taunton. At this time, he began to write on the condition of parties in the church, as well as on the topic of philosophical reform in the lost tract "Temporis Partus Maximus". Yet he failed to gain a position that he thought would lead him to success. He showed signs of sympathy to Puritanism, attending the sermons of the Puritan chaplain of Gray's Inn and accompanying his mother to the Temple Church to hear Walter Travers. This led to the publication of his earliest surviving tract, which criticized the English church's suppression of the Puritan clergy. In the Parliament of 1586, he openly urged execution for the Catholic Mary, Queen of Scots.
About this time, he again approached his powerful uncle for help; this move was followed by his rapid progress at the bar. He became a bencher in 1586 and was elected a Reader in 1587, delivering his first set of lectures in Lent the following year. In 1589, he received the valuable appointment of reversion to the Clerkship of the Star Chamber, although he did not formally take office until 1608; the post was worth £1,600 a year.
In 1588 he became MP for Liverpool and then for Middlesex in 1593. He later sat three times for Ipswich (1597, 1601, 1604) and once for Cambridge University (1614).
He became known as a liberal-minded reformer, eager to amend and simplify the law. Though a friend of the crown, he opposed feudal privileges and dictatorial powers. He spoke against religious persecution. He struck at the House of Lords in its usurpation of the Money Bills. He advocated for the union of England and Scotland, which made him a significant influence toward the consolidation of the United Kingdom; and he later would advocate for the integration of Ireland into the Union. Closer constitutional ties, he believed, would bring greater peace and strength to these countries.
Bacon soon became acquainted with Robert Devereux, 2nd Earl of Essex, Queen Elizabeth's favorite. By 1591 he acted as the earl's confidential adviser.
In 1592 he was commissioned to write a tract in response to the Jesuit Robert Parson's anti-government polemic, which he titled "Certain observations made upon a libel", identifying England with the ideals of democratic Athens against the belligerence of Spain.
Bacon took his third parliamentary seat for Middlesex when in February 1593 Elizabeth summoned Parliament to investigate a Roman Catholic plot against her. Bacon's opposition to a bill that would levy triple subsidies in half the usual time offended the Queen: opponents accused him of seeking popularity, and for a time the Court excluded him from favour.
When the office of Attorney General fell vacant in 1594, Lord Essex's influence was not enough to secure the position for Bacon and it was given to Sir Edward Coke. Likewise, Bacon failed to secure the lesser office of Solicitor General in 1595, the Queen pointedly snubbing him by appointing Sir Thomas Fleming instead. To console him for these disappointments, Essex presented him with a property at Twickenham, which Bacon subsequently sold for £1,800.
In 1597 Bacon became the first Queen's Counsel designate, when Queen Elizabeth reserved him as her legal counsel. In 1597, he was also given a patent, giving him precedence at the Bar. Despite his designations, he was unable to gain the status and notoriety of others. In a plan to revive his position he unsuccessfully courted the wealthy young widow Lady Elizabeth Hatton. His courtship failed after she broke off their relationship upon accepting marriage to Sir Edward Coke, a further spark of enmity between the men. In 1598 Bacon was arrested for debt. Afterward, however, his standing in the Queen's eyes improved. Gradually, Bacon earned the standing of one of the learned counsels. His relationship with the Queen further improved when he severed ties with Essexa shrewd move, as Essex would be executed for treason in 1601.
With others, Bacon was appointed to investigate the charges against Essex. A number of Essex's followers confessed that Essex had planned a rebellion against the Queen. Bacon was subsequently a part of the legal team headed by the Attorney General Sir Edward Coke at Essex's treason trial. After the execution, the Queen ordered Bacon to write the official government account of the trial, which was later published as "A DECLARATION of the Practices and Treasons attempted and committed by Robert late Earle of Essex and his Complices, against her Majestie and her Kingdoms ..." after Bacon's first draft was heavily edited by the Queen and her ministers.
According to his personal secretary and chaplain, William Rawley, as a judge Bacon was always tender-hearted, "looking upon the examples with the eye of severity, but upon the person with the eye of pity and compassion". And also that "he was free from malice", "no revenger of injuries", and "no defamer of any man".
The succession of James I brought Bacon into greater favour. He was knighted in 1603. In another shrewd move, Bacon wrote his "Apologies" in defense of his proceedings in the case of Essex, as Essex had favoured James to succeed to the throne.
The following year, during the course of the uneventful first parliament session, Bacon married Alice Barnham. In June 1607 he was at last rewarded with the office of solicitor general. The following year, he began working as the Clerkship of the Star Chamber. Despite a generous income, old debts still could not be paid. He sought further promotion and wealth by supporting King James and his arbitrary policies.
In 1610 the fourth session of James's first parliament met. Despite Bacon's advice to him, James and the Commons found themselves at odds over royal prerogatives and the king's embarrassing extravagance. The House was finally dissolved in February 1611. Throughout this period Bacon managed to stay in the favor of the king while retaining the confidence of the Commons.
In 1613 Bacon was finally appointed attorney general, after advising the king to shuffle judicial appointments. As attorney general, Bacon, by his zealous efforts—which included torture—to obtain the conviction of Edmund Peacham for treason, raised legal controversies of high constitutional importance; and successfully prosecuted Robert Carr, 1st Earl of Somerset, and his wife, Frances Howard, Countess of Somerset, for murder in 1616. The so-called Prince's Parliament of April 1614 objected to Bacon's presence in the seat for Cambridge and to the various royal plans that Bacon had supported. Although he was allowed to stay, parliament passed a law that forbade the attorney general to sit in parliament. His influence over the king had evidently inspired resentment or apprehension in many of his peers. Bacon, however, continued to receive the King's favour, which led to his appointment in March 1617 as temporary Regent of England (for a period of a month), and in 1618 as Lord Chancellor. On 12 July 1618 the king created Bacon Baron Verulam, of Verulam, in the Peerage of England; he then became known as Francis, Lord Verulam.
Bacon continued to use his influence with the king to mediate between the throne and Parliament, and in this capacity he was further elevated in the same peerage, as Viscount St Alban, on 27 January 1621.
Bacon's public career ended in disgrace in 1621. After he fell into debt, a parliamentary committee on the administration of the law charged him with 23 separate counts of corruption. His lifelong enemy, Sir Edward Coke, who had instigated these accusations, was one of those appointed to prepare the charges against the chancellor. To the lords, who sent a committee to enquire whether a confession was really his, he replied, "My lords, it is my act, my hand, and my heart; I beseech your lordships to be merciful to a broken reed." He was sentenced to a fine of £40,000 and committed to the Tower of London at the king's pleasure; the imprisonment lasted only a few days and the fine was remitted by the king. More seriously, parliament declared Bacon incapable of holding future office or sitting in parliament. He narrowly escaped undergoing degradation, which would have stripped him of his titles of nobility. Subsequently, the disgraced viscount devoted himself to study and writing.
There seems little doubt that Bacon had accepted gifts from litigants, but this was an accepted custom of the time and not necessarily evidence of deeply corrupt behaviour. While acknowledging that his conduct had been lax, he countered that he had never allowed gifts to influence his judgement and, indeed, he had on occasion given a verdict against those who had paid him. He even had an interview with King James in which he assured:
He also wrote the following to Buckingham:
The true reason for his acknowledgement of guilt is the subject of debate, but some authors speculate that it may have been prompted by his sickness, or by a view that through his fame and the greatness of his office he would be spared harsh punishment. He may even have been blackmailed, with a threat to charge him with sodomy, into confession.
The British jurist Basil Montagu wrote in Bacon's defense, concerning the episode of his public disgrace:
Bacon was a devout Anglican. He believed that philosophy and the natural world must be studied inductively, but argued that we can only study arguments for the existence of God. Information on his attributes (such as nature, action, and purposes) can only come from special revelation. But Bacon also held that knowledge was cumulative, that study encompassed more than a simple preservation of the past. "Knowledge is the rich storehouse for the glory of the Creator and the relief of man's estate," he wrote. In his Essays, he affirms that "a little philosophy inclineth man's mind to atheism, but depth in philosophy bringeth men's minds about to religion."
Bacon's idea of idols of the mind may have self-consciously represented an attempt to Christianize science at the same time as developing a new, reliable scientific method; Bacon gave worship of Neptune as an example of the idola tribus fallacy, hinting at the religious dimensions of his critique of the idols.
When he was 36, Bacon courted Elizabeth Hatton, a young widow of 20. Reportedly, she broke off their relationship upon accepting marriage to a wealthier man, Bacon's rival, Sir Edward Coke. Years later, Bacon still wrote of his regret that the marriage to Hatton had not taken place.
At the age of 45, Bacon married Alice Barnham, the 14-year-old daughter of a well-connected London alderman and MP. Bacon wrote two sonnets proclaiming his love for Alice. The first was written during his courtship and the second on his wedding day, 10 May 1606. When Bacon was appointed lord chancellor, "by special Warrant of the King", Lady Bacon was given precedence over all other Court ladies. Bacon's personal secretary and chaplain, William Rawley, wrote in his biography of Bacon that his marriage was one of "much conjugal love and respect", mentioning a robe of honor that he gave to Alice and which "she wore unto her dying day, being twenty years and more after his death".
However, an increasing number of reports circulated about friction in the marriage, with speculation that this may have been due to Alice's making do with less money than she had once been accustomed to. It was said that she was strongly interested in fame and fortune, and when household finances dwindled, she complained bitterly. Bunten wrote in her "Life of Alice Barnham" that, upon their descent into debt, she went on trips to ask for financial favours and assistance from their circle of friends. Bacon disinherited her upon discovering her secret romantic relationship with Sir John Underhill. He subsequently rewrote his will, which had previously been very generousleaving her lands, goods, and incomeand instead revoked it all.
Several authors believe that, despite his marriage, Bacon was primarily attracted to men. Forker, for example, has explored the "historically documentable sexual preferences" of both Francis Bacon and King James I and concluded they were both orientated to "masculine love", a contemporary term that "seems to have been used exclusively to refer to the sexual preference of men for members of their own gender."
The well-connected antiquary John Aubrey noted in his "Brief Lives" concerning Bacon, "He was a Pederast. His Ganimeds and Favourites tooke Bribes". ("Pederast" in Renaissance diction meant generally "homosexual" rather than specifically a lover of minors; "ganimed" derives from the mythical prince abducted by Zeus to be his cup-bearer and bed warmer.) 
The Jacobean antiquarian, Sir Simonds D'Ewes (Bacon's fellow Member of Parliament) implied there had been a question of bringing him to trial for buggery, which his brother Anthony Bacon had also been charged with.
In his "Autobiography and Correspondence", in the diary entry for 3 May 1621, the date of Bacon's censure by Parliament, D'Ewes describes Bacon's love for his Welsh serving-men, in particular Godrick, a "very effeminate-faced youth" whom he calls "his catamite and bedfellow".
This conclusion has been disputed by others, who point to lack of consistent evidence, and consider the sources to be more open to interpretation. Publicly, at least, Bacon distanced himself from the idea of homosexuality. In his "New Atlantis", he described his utopian island as being "the chastest nation under heaven", and "as for masculine love, they have no touch of it".
On 9 April 1626, Francis Bacon died of pneumonia while at Arundel mansion at Highgate outside London. An influential account of the circumstances of his death was given by John Aubrey's "Brief Lives". Aubrey's vivid account, which portrays Bacon as a martyr to experimental scientific method, had him journeying to High-gate through the snow with the King's physician when he is suddenly inspired by the possibility of using the snow to preserve meat:They were resolved they would try the experiment presently. They alighted out of the coach and went into a poor woman's house at the bottom of Highgate hill, and bought a fowl, and made the woman exenterate it.
After stuffing the fowl with snow, Bacon contracted a fatal case of pneumonia. Some people, including Aubrey, consider these two contiguous, possibly coincidental events as related and causative of his death:The Snow so chilled him that he immediately fell so extremely ill, that he could not return to his Lodging … but went to the Earle of Arundel's house at Highgate, where they put him into … a damp bed that had not been layn-in … which gave him such a cold that in 2 or 3 days as I remember Mr Hobbes told me, he died of Suffocation.Aubrey has been criticized for his evident credulousness in this and other works; on the other hand, he knew Thomas Hobbes, Bacon's fellow-philosopher and friend.
Being unwittingly on his deathbed, the philosopher dictated his last letter to his absent host and friend Lord Arundel:My very good Lord,—I was likely to have had the fortune of Caius Plinius the elder, who lost his life by trying an experiment about the burning of Mount Vesuvius; for I was also desirous to try an experiment or two touching the conservation and in-duration of bodies. As for the experiment itself, it succeeded excellently well; but in the journey between London and High-gate, I was taken with such a fit of casting as I know not whether it were the Stone, or some surfeit or cold, or indeed a touch of them all three. But when I came to your Lordship's House, I was not able to go back, and therefore was forced to take up my lodging here, where your housekeeper is very careful and diligent about me, which I assure myself your Lordship will not only pardon towards him, but think the better of him for it. For indeed your Lordship's House was happy to me, and I kiss your noble hands for the welcome which I am sure you give me to it. I know how unfit it is for me to write with any other hand than mine own, but by my troth my fingers are so disjointed with sickness that I cannot steadily hold a pen.
Another account appears in a biography by William Rawley, Bacon's personal secretary and chaplain:He died on the ninth day of April in the year 1626, in the early morning of the day then celebrated for our Savior's resurrection, in the sixty-sixth year of his age, at the Earl of Arundel's house in Highgate, near London, to which place he casually repaired about a week before; God so ordaining that he should die there of a gentle fever, accidentally accompanied with a great cold, whereby the defluxion of rheum fell so plentifully upon his breast, that he died by suffocation.
He was buried in St Michael's church in St Albans. At the news of his death, over 30 great minds collected together their eulogies of him, which were then later published in Latin. 
He left personal assets of about £7,000 and lands that realised £6,000 when sold. His debts amounted to more than £23,000, equivalent to more than £3m at current value.
Francis Bacon's philosophy is displayed in the vast and varied writings he left, which might be divided into three great branches:
Bacon's seminal work "Novum Organum" was influential in the 1630s and 1650s among scholars, in particular Sir Thomas Browne, who in his encyclopedia "Pseudodoxia Epidemica" (1646–72) frequently adheres to a Baconian approach to his scientific enquiries. This book entails the basis of the Scientific Method as a means of observation and induction.
According to Francis Bacon, learning and knowledge all derive from the basis of inductive reasoning. Through his belief of experimental encounters, he theorized that all the knowledge that was necessary to fully understand a concept could be attainable because of induction. In order to get to the point of an inductive conclusion, one must consider the importance of observing the particulars (specific parts of nature). "Once these particulars have been gathered together, the interpretation of Nature proceeds by sorting them into a formal arrangement so that they may be presented to the understanding." Experimentation is essential to discovering the truths of Nature. When an experiment happens, parts of the tested hypothesis are started to be pieced together, forming a result and conclusion. Through this conclusion of particulars, an understanding of Nature can be formed. Now that an understanding of Nature has been arrived at, an inductive conclusion can be drawn. "For no one successfully investigates the nature of a thing in the thing itself; the inquiry must be enlarged to things that have more in common with it."
Francis Bacon explains how we come to this understanding and knowledge because of this process in comprehending the complexities of nature. "Bacon sees nature as an extremely subtle complexity, which affords all the energy of the natural philosopher to disclose her secrets." Bacon described the evidence and proof revealed through taking a specific example from nature and expanding that example into a general, substantial claim of nature. Once we understand the particulars in nature, we can learn more about it and become surer of things occurring in nature, gaining knowledge and obtaining new information all the while. "It is nothing less than a revival of Bacon’s supremely confident belief that inductive methods can provide us with ultimate and infallible answers concerning the laws and nature of the universe." Bacon states that when we come to understand parts of nature, we can eventually understand nature better as a whole because of induction. Because of this, Bacon concludes that all learning and knowledge must be drawn from inductive reasoning.
During the Restoration, Bacon was commonly invoked as a guiding spirit of the Royal Society founded under Charles II in 1660. During the 18th-century French Enlightenment, Bacon's non-metaphysical approach to science became more influential than the dualism of his French contemporary Descartes, and was associated with criticism of the "ancien regime". In 1733 Voltaire introduced him to a French audience as the "father" of the scientific method, an understanding which had become widespread by the 1750s. In the 19th century his emphasis on induction was revived and developed by William Whewell, among others. He has been reputed as the "Father of Experimental Philosophy".
He also wrote a long treatise on Medicine, "History of Life and Death", with natural and experimental observations for the prolongation of life.
One of his biographers, the historian William Hepworth Dixon, states: "Bacon's influence in the modern world is so great that every man who rides in a train, sends a telegram, follows a steam plough, sits in an easy chair, crosses the channel or the Atlantic, eats a good dinner, enjoys a beautiful garden, or undergoes a painless surgical operation, owes him something."
In 1902 Hugo von Hofmannsthal published a fictional letter, known as "The Lord Chandos Letter", addressed to Bacon and dated 1603, about a writer who is experiencing a crisis of language.
Although Bacon’s works are extremely instrumental, his argument falls short because observation and the scientific method are not completely necessary for everything. Bacon takes the inductive method too far, as seen through one of his aphorisms which says, "Man, being the servant and interpreter of Nature, can do and understand so much only as he has observed in fact or in thought of the course of nature: Beyond this he neither knows anything nor can do anything." As humans, we are capable of more than pure observation and can use deduction to form theories. In fact, we must use deduction because Bacon’s pure inductive method is incomplete. Thus, it is not Bacon’s ideas alone that form the scientific method we use today. If that were the case, we would not be able to fully understand the observations we make and deduce new theories. Author Ernst Mayr states, "Inductivism had a great vogue in the eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries, but it is now clear that a purely inductive approach is quite sterile." Mayr points out that an inductive approach on its own just doesn’t work. One could observe an experiment multiple times, but still be unable to make generalizations and correctly understand the knowledge. Bacon’s inductive method is beneficial, but incomplete and leaves gaps.
However, when combined with the ideas of Descartes, the gaps are filled in Bacon’s inductive method. The "anticipation of nature" as Bacon puts it, connects the information gained from observation, enabling hypotheses and theories to become more effective. Bacon’s inductive ideas now have more value. Jurgen Klein, who researched Bacon and analyzed his works, says, "The inductive method helps the human mind to find a way to ascertain truthful knowledge." Klein shows the value that Bacon’s method truly brings. It is not a value that stands on its own, for it has holes, but it is a value that supports and strengthens. The inductive method can be seen as a tool used alongside other ideas, such as deduction, which now creates a method which is most effective and used today: the scientific method. The inductive method is more prominent in the scientific method than other ideas, which leads to misconception, but the takeaway is that it has supporting ideas. Francis Bacon’s scientific method is extremely influential, but has been developed for its own good, as all great ideas are.
Bacon played a leading role in establishing the British colonies in North America, especially in Virginia, the Carolinas and Newfoundland in northeastern Canada. His government report on "The Virginia Colony" was submitted in 1609. In 1610 Bacon and his associates received a charter from the king to form "the Tresurer and the Companye of Adventurers and planter of the Cittye of London and Bristoll for the Collonye or plantacon in Newfoundland", and sent John Guy to found a colony there. Thomas Jefferson, the third President of the United States, wrote: "Bacon, Locke and Newton. I consider them as the three greatest men that have ever lived, without any exception, and as having laid the foundation of those superstructures which have been raised in the Physical and Moral sciences".
In 1910 Newfoundland issued a postage stamp to commemorate Bacon's role in establishing the colony. The stamp describes Bacon as "the guiding spirit in Colonization Schemes in 1610". Moreover, some scholars believe he was largely responsible for the drafting, in 1609 and 1612, of two charters of government for the Virginia Colony. William Hepworth Dixon considered that Bacon's name could be included in the list of Founders of the United States.
Although few of his proposals for law reform were adopted during his lifetime, Bacon's legal legacy was considered by the magazine "New Scientist" in 1961 as having influenced the drafting of the Napoleonic Code as well as the law reforms introduced by 19th-century British Prime Minister Sir Robert Peel. The historian William Hepworth Dixon referred to the Napoleonic Code as "the sole embodiment of Bacon's thought", saying that Bacon's legal work "has had more success abroad than it has found at home", and that in France "it has blossomed and come into fruit".
Harvey Wheeler attributed to Bacon, in "Francis Bacon's Verulamiumthe Common Law Template of The Modern in English Science and Culture", the creation of these distinguishing features of the modern common law system:
As late as the 18th century some juries still declared the law rather than the facts, but already before the end of the 17th century Sir Matthew Hale explained modern common law adjudication procedure and acknowledged Bacon as the inventor of the process of discovering unwritten laws from the evidences of their applications. The method combined empiricism and inductivism in a new way that was to imprint its signature on many of the distinctive features of modern English society. Paul H. Kocher writes that Bacon is considered by some jurists to be the father of modern Jurisprudence.
Bacon is commemorated with a statue in Gray's Inn, South Square in London where he received his legal training, and where he was elected Treasurer of the Inn in 1608.
More recent scholarship on Bacon's jurisprudence has focused on his advocating torture as a legal recourse for the crown. Bacon himself was not a stranger to the torture chamber; in his various legal capacities in both Elizabeth I's and James I's reigns, Bacon was listed as a commissioner on five torture warrants. In 1613(?), in a letter addressed to King James I on the question of torture's place within English law, Bacon identifies the scope of torture as a means to further the investigation of threats to the state: "In the cases of treasons, torture is used for discovery, and not for evidence." For Bacon, torture was not a punitive measure, an intended form of state repression, but instead offered a modus operandi for the government agent tasked with uncovering acts of treason.
Francis Bacon developed the idea that a classification of knowledge must be universal while handling all possible resources. In his progressive view, humanity would be better if the access to educational resources were provided to the public, hence the need to organise it. His approach to learning reshaped the Western view of knowledge theory from an individual to a social interest.
The original classification proposed by Bacon organised all types of knowledge in three general groups: history, poetry, and philosophy. He did that based on his understanding of how information is processed: memory, imagination, and reason, respectively. His methodical approach to the categorization of knowledge goes hand-in-hand with his principles of scientific methods. Bacon’s writings were the starting point for William Torrey Harris classification system for libraries in the United States by the second half of the 1800s.
The Baconian hypothesis of Shakespearean authorship, first proposed in the mid-19th century, contends that Francis Bacon wrote some or even all of the plays conventionally attributed to William Shakespeare.
Francis Bacon often gathered with the men at Gray's Inn to discuss politics and philosophy, and to try out various theatrical scenes that he admitted writing. Bacon's alleged connection to the Rosicrucians and the Freemasons has been widely discussed by authors and scholars in many books. However, others, including Daphne du Maurier in her biography of Bacon, have argued that there is no substantive evidence to support claims of involvement with the Rosicrucians. Frances Yates does not make the claim that Bacon was a Rosicrucian, but presents evidence that he was nevertheless involved in some of the more closed intellectual movements of his day. She argues that Bacon's movement for the advancement of learning was closely connected with the German Rosicrucian movement, while Bacon's "New Atlantis" portrays a land ruled by Rosicrucians. He apparently saw his own movement for the advancement of learning to be in conformity with Rosicrucian ideals.
The link between Bacon's work and the Rosicrucians' ideals which Yates allegedly found was the conformity of the purposes expressed by the Rosicrucian Manifestos and Bacon's plan of a "Great Instauration", for the two were calling for a reformation of both "divine and human understanding", as well as both had in view the purpose of mankind's return to the "state before the Fall".
Another major link is said to be the resemblance between Bacon's "New Atlantis" and the German Rosicrucian Johann Valentin Andreae's "Description of the Republic of Christianopolis" (1619). Andreae describes a utopic island in which Christian theosophy and applied science ruled, and in which the spiritual fulfilment and intellectual activity constituted the primary goals of each individual, the scientific pursuits being the highest intellectual callinglinked to the achievement of spiritual perfection. Andreae's island also depicts a great advancement in technology, with many industries separated in different zones which supplied the population's needswhich shows great resemblance to Bacon's scientific methods and purposes.
While rejecting occult conspiracy theories surrounding Bacon and the claim Bacon personally identified as a Rosicrucian, intellectual historian Paolo Rossi has argued for an occult influence on Bacon's scientific and religious writing. He argues that Bacon was familiar with early modern alchemical texts and that Bacon's ideas about the application of science had roots in Renaissance magical ideas about science and magic facilitating humanity's domination of nature. Rossi further interprets Bacon's search for hidden meanings in myth and fables in such texts as "The Wisdom of the Ancients" as succeeding earlier occultist and Neoplatonic attempts to locate hidden wisdom in pre-Christian myths. As indicated by the title of his study, however, Rossi claims Bacon ultimately rejected the philosophical foundations of occultism as he came to develop a form of modern science.
Rossi's analysis and claims have been extended by Jason Josephson-Storm in his study, "The Myth of Disenchantment". Josephson-Storm also rejects conspiracy theories surrounding Bacon and does not make the claim that Bacon was an active Rosicrucian. However, he argues that Bacon's "rejection" of magic actually constituted an attempt to purify magic of Catholic, demonic, and esoteric influences and to establish magic as a field of study and application paralleling Bacon's vision of science. Furthermore, Josephson-Storm argues that Bacon drew on magical ideas when developing his experimental method. Josephson-Storm finds evidence that Bacon considered nature a living entity, populated by spirits, and argues Bacon's views on the human domination and application of nature actually depend on his spiritualism and personification of nature.
The Rosicrucian organization AMORC claims that Bacon was the "Imperator" (leader) of the Rosicrucian Order in both England and the European continent, and would have directed it during his lifetime.
Bacon's influence can also be seen on a variety of religious and spiritual authors, and on groups that have utilized his writings in their own belief systems.
Some of the more notable works by Bacon are:
 
 

</doc>
<doc id="11322" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11322" title="February 2">
February 2


</doc>
<doc id="11323" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11323" title="February 3">
February 3


</doc>
<doc id="11324" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11324" title="Free On-line Dictionary of Computing">
Free On-line Dictionary of Computing

The Free On-line Dictionary of Computing (FOLDOC) is an online, searchable, encyclopedic dictionary of computing subjects.
FOLDOC was founded in 1985 by Denis Howe and was hosted by Imperial College London. In May 2015, the site was updated to state that it was "no longer supported by Imperial College Department of Computing". Howe has served as the editor-in-chief since the dictionary's inception, with visitors to the website able to make suggestions for additions or corrections to articles.
The dictionary incorporates the text of other free resources, such as the Jargon File, as well as covering many other computing-related topics. Due to its availability under the GNU Free Documentation License, a copyleft license, it has in turn been incorporated in whole or part into other free content projects, such as Wikipedia.

</doc>
<doc id="11325" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11325" title="Wikipedia:Status of FOLDOC import">
Wikipedia:Status of FOLDOC import

This is a title index of all the entries at the Free On-line Dictionary of Computing, which we have been given to use. This page is to keep track of what has been incorporated into Wikipedia. Anyone who wants to help, jump right in. As entries are imported, simply add DONE after the link.
A few notes:
"See also:" Free On-line Dictionary of Computing
These are FOLDOC mirrors, which may not be up-to-date:

</doc>
<doc id="11327" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11327" title="Wikipedia:Free On-line Dictionary of Computing/symbols - B">
Wikipedia:Free On-line Dictionary of Computing/symbols - B

! -- DONE renamed to exclamation mark<br>
" -- DONE renamed to double quote<br>
% -- DONE renamed to percent<br>
, -- DONE renamed to comma<br>
0 -- DONE renamed to zero<br>
0/1 knapsack problem -- DONE<br>
100BaseFX -- DONE<br>
100BaseT -- DONE<br>
100BaseTX -- DONE<br>
100BaseVG -- DONE<br>
100VG-AnyLAN -- DONE (redirected to 100BaseVG)<br>
10base2 -- DONE<br>
10base5 -- DONE<br>
10baseT -- DONE<br>
120 reset -- DONE<br>
1-2-3 -- DONE (renamed Lotus 1-2-3)<br>
1394 -- DONE (renamed Firewire)<br>
1541 -- DONE (renamed Commodore 1541)<br>
1581 -- DONE (renamed Commodore 1581)<br>
16550 -- DONE (renamed 16550 UART)<br>
16 bit -- DONE<br>
16-bit application -- DONE<br>
1802 -- DONE (renamed CDP1802) -- REDONE (merged into RCA 1802)<br>
1NF -- DONE (renamed database normalization)<br>
1TBS -- DONE (renamed to One True Brace Style)<br>
1.TR.6 -- DONE<br>
2 -- DONE renamed to Number 2 <br>
20-GATE -- DONE (probably should be 20-Gate programming language, but I'm not sure)<br>
2780 -- DONE (renamed Binary Synchronous Transmission)<br>
2B1D -- DONE (renamed to Basic Rate Interface)<br>
2B1Q -- DONE (renamed to two-binary, one-quaternary)<br>
2B+D -- DONE (renamed to Basic Rate Interface)<br>
2NF -- DONE (renamed database normalization)<br>
2.PAK -- DONE<br>
320xx -- DONE (renamed 320xx microprocessor)<br>
3270 -- DONE (renamed IBM 3270)<br>
32-bit application -- DONE<br>
3780 -- DONE (renamed Binary Synchronous Transmission)<br>
386 -- DONE renamed to (Intel 80386)<br>
386BSD -- DONE (integrated with our article)<br>
386SPART.PAR -- "DONE"'<br>
3Com Corporation -- DONE<br>
3DO -- DONE<br>
3GL -- DONE (renamed Third generation language)<br>
3NF -- DONE (renamed database normalization)<br>
3Station -- DONE<br>
3-tier -- DONE renamed to 3-tier (computing)<br>
404 -- DONE (renamed 404 error)<br>
4.2BSD -- DONE renamed to Berkeley Software Distribution<br>
431A -- DONE<br>
4510 -- DONE<br>
473L Query -- DONE (renamed 473L Query programming language)<br>
486 -- DONE (renamed Intel 80486)<br>
486SX -- DONE (renamed Intel 80486SX<br>
4GL -- DONE (renamed fourth generation language)<br>
4NF -- DONE (renamed database normalization)<br>
51forth -- DONE (renamed 51forth programming language)<br>
56 kbps -- DONE<br>
56k line -- DONE<br>
586 -- NO IMPORT: "What the Pentium was not called" isn't exactly an article. ;-)<br>
5ESS Switch -- DONE<br>
5NF -- DONE (renamed database normalization)<br>
5th Glove -- DONE<br>
6.001 -- DONE renamed to 6.001 (MIT)<br>
610 -- DONE<br>
6309 -- DONE (renamed Hitachi 6309)<br>
64 bit -- DONE<br>
6501 -- DONE (renamed MOS Technologies 6501)<br>
6502 -- DONE (renamed MOS Technologies 6502)<br>
650x -- DONE (renamed MOS Technologies 650x)<br>
6510 -- DONE (renamed MOS Technologies 6510)<br>
65816 -- DONE (renamed MOS Technologies 65816)<br>
6800 -- DONE (renamed Motorola 6800)<br>
68000 -- DONE renamed to Motorola 68000<br>
68020 -- DONE (renamed Motorola 68020)<br>
68030 -- DONE (renamed Motorola 68030)<br>
68040 -- DONE (renamed Motorola 68040)<br>
68050 -- DONE<br>
68060 -- DONE (renamed Motorola 68060)<br>
6809 -- DONE (renamed Motorola 6809)<br>
680x0 -- DONE renamed to Motorola 680x0<br>
686 -- DONE (see other meanings links)<br>
68HC11 -- DONE (renamed Motorola 68HC11)<br>
68LC040 -- DONE (renamed Motorola 68LC040)<br>
6x86 -- DONE (renamed Cyrix 6x86<br>
754 -- DONE (renamed IEEE Floating Point Standard<br>
80186 -- DONE (renamed Intel 80186)<br>
80188 -- DONE (renamed Intel 80188)<br>
802.2 -- DONE (renamed IEEE 802.2<br>
802.3 -- DONE (renamed IEEE 802.3<br>
80286 -- NO IMPORT (already exists)<br>
8031 -- DONE (renamed Intel 8051)<br>
80386 -- NO IMPORT (already exists)<br>
8048 -- DONE (renamed Intel 8048)<br>
80486 -- NO IMPORT (already exists)<br>
8051 -- DONE (renamed Intel 8051)<br>
8052 -- DONE (renamed Intel 8051)<br>
8080 -- DONE (renamed Intel 8080)<br>
8086 -- DONE (renamed Intel 8086)<br>
8088 -- NO IMPORT (already exists)<br>
80x86 -- DONE (renamed Intel 80x86)<br>
822 -- DONE (renamed RFC 822)<br>
82430FX -- DONE (renamed Triton II)<br>
82430HX -- DONE (renamed Triton II)<br>
82430MX -- DONE (renamed Mobile Triton)<br>
82430VX -- DONE (renamed Triton VX)<br>
8.3 -- DONE (renamed 8.3 (computing))<br>
8514 -- DONE (renamed 8514 (display standard))<br>
8514-A -- DONE (renamed 8514 (display standard))<br>
88000 -- DONE (renamed Motorola 88000)<br>
88open -- DONE<br>
8-bit clean -- DONE<br>
8N1 -- DONE<br>
8 queens problem -- NO IMPORT (already exists)<br>
8 queens puzzle -- NO IMPORT (already exists)<br>
8x86 -- DONE (renamed Intel 80x86)<br>
90-90 Rule -- DONE (renamed Ninety-Ninety Rule)<br>
9PAC -- DONE<br>
<br> -- NO IMPORT (what is this supposed to be?)<br>
= -- DONE (renamed to equals (computing))<br>
@ -- DONE (renamed to commercial at (computing))<br>
A# -- DONE (renamed to A sharp)<br>
A-0 -- DONE<br>
a1 -- DONE<br>
A1 security -- DONE (renamed to Orange Book)<br>
A20 handler -- DONE<br>
A-3 -- DONE (renamed to ARITH-MATIC)<br>
A3D -- DONE<br>
a56 -- DONE<br>
AADL -- DONE (renamed to Axiomatic Architecture Description Language)<br>
AAL -- DONE (renamed to ATM Adaptation Layer)<br>
AAP -- DONE (renamed to Associaton of American Publishers)<br>
AAP DTD -- DONE<br>
aard -- DONE<br>
AARP -- DONE (renamed to Apple Address Resolution Protocol)<br>
AARP probe packets -- DONE (renamed to AARP probe packet)<br>
AAUI -- DONE (renamed to Apple Attachment Unit Interface)<br>
A&ampB -- DONE<br>
abbrev -- NO IMPORT (not suitable for an encyclopedia article)<br>
Abbreviated Test Language for Avionics Systems -- DONE<br>
ABC -- DONE (renamed to ABC (programming))<br>
ABC ALGOL -- DONE<br>
ABCL/1 -- DONE<br>
ABCL/c+ -- DONE (renamed to ABCL/c plus)<br>
ABCL/R -- DONE<br>
ABCL/R2 -- DONE<br>
abduction -- DONE (renamed to abduction (logic))<br>
ABEND -- DONE<br>
ABI -- DONE (renamed to Application Binary Interface)<br>
ABLE -- DONE<br>
ABM -- DONE (renamed to Asynchronous Balanced Mode)<br>
ABNF -- DONE (renamed to Augmented Backus-Naur Form)<br>
abort -- DONE (renamed to Abort (computing))<br>
ABP -- "'DONE"<br>
ABR -- DONE (renamed to Automatic baud rate detection)<br>
abscissa -- DONE<br>
ABSET -- DONE<br>
absolute path -- DONE<br>
absolute pathname -- DONE renamed to absolute path<br>
abstract class -- DONE<br>
abstract data type -- NO IMPORT (already exists)<br>
abstract interpretation -- DONE<br>
abstraction -- DONE (renamed to abstraction (programming))<br>
abstract machine -- DONE<br>
Abstract Machine Notation -- DONE<br>
abstract syntax -- DONE<br>
Abstract Syntax Notation 1 -- DONE<br>
abstract syntax tree -- DONE<br>
Abstract-Type and Scheme-Definition Language -- DONE<br>
Abstract Windowing Toolkit -- DONE<br>
Abstract Window Toolkit -- DONE (renamed to Abstract Window Toolkit)<br>
ABSYS -- DONE<br>
ACA -- DONE (renamed to Application Control Architecture)<br>
ACAP -- DONE (renamed to Application Configuration Access Protocol)<br>
Accelerated Graphics Port -- DONE<br>
accelerator -- DONE (renamed to Accelerator (computing))<br>
Accent -- DONE (renamed to Accent (programming language))<br>
accept -- DONE (renamed to Accept (computing routine))<br>
Acceptable Use Policy -- DONE<br>
acceptance testing -- DONE<br>
Acceptance, Test Or Launch Language -- DONE<br>
acceptor -- "NO IMPORT" (already have article on Finite state machine; left FOLDOC article in if anyone wants to merge it) <br>
Access -- "DONE" (part when to Access query language, the communications program went to Microsoft Access, since we already have an article on Microsoft Access the database, that was dumped in )<br>
Access Control List -- DONE<br>
access method -- DONE<br>
access permission<br>
access time<br>
ACCLAIM<br>
Accounting File<br>
accounting management<br>
ACCU<br>
accumulator -- DONE<br>
accuracy<br>
ACE<br>
ACF<br>
ACF/NCP<br>
ACIA<br>
ACID<br>
ACIS<br>
ACK<br>
ACL<br>
ACM<br>
ACME<br>
ACOM<br>
Acorn Archimedes<br>
Acorn Computer Group<br>
Acorn Computers Ltd.<br>
Acorn RISC Machine<br>
ACOS<br>
acoustic coupler<br>
ACP<br>
ACPI -- DONE<br>
Acrobat<br>
acronym<br>
ACSE<br>
ACT -- see Annual Change Traffic, Ada Core Technologies <br>
ACT++<br>
Act1<br>
Act2<br>
Act3<br>
Actalk<br>
Actis<br>
activation record<br>
active DBMS<br>
Active Directory<br>
Active Language I<br>
active matrix display<br>
Active Monitor<br>
active object<br>
Active Reconfiguring Message<br>
Active Server Pages<br>
ActiveX<br>
ACT ONE<br>
Actor<br>
actor<br>
Actors<br>
actor/singer/waiter/webmaster<br>
Actra<br>
Actus<br>
AD<br>
ad<br>
Ada<br>
Ada++<br>
Ada 83<br>
Ada 95<br>
Ada 9X<br>
ADABAS<br>
Ada Core Technologies<br>
Ada/Ed<br>
Adaline<br>
Ada Lovelace<br>
ADAM<br>
Adam7<br>
Adamakegen<br>
ADAMO<br>
Ada-O<br>
Adaplan<br>
Adaplex<br>
Ada Programming Support Environment<br>
ADAPT<br>
Adaptable User Interface<br>
Adaptec<br>
adaptive answering<br>
Adaptive Communication Environment<br>
Adaptive Digital Pulse Code Modulation<br>
adaptive learning<br>
adaptive routing<br>
Adaptive Simulated Annealing<br>
Adaptive TRansform Acoustic Coding<br>
Adaptor<br>
Ada Semantic Interface Specification<br>
Ada Software Repository<br>
ADC<br>
ADCCP<br>
A/D converter<br>
AD/Cycle<br>
ADD 1 TO COBOL GIVING COBOL<br>
ADDD<br>
additive<br>
address<br>
address bus<br>
addressed call mode<br>
addressee<br>
addressing mode<br>
address mask<br>
address resolution<br>
Address Resolution Protocol<br>
address space<br>
Address Strobe<br>
ADELE<br>
ADES<br>
ad hoc -- NO IMPORT (already exists) <br>
ad-hockery<br>
ad-hoc polymorphism -- NO IMPORT (already exists)<br>
Aditi<br>
adjacency<br>
adjacent<br>
ADL<br>
AdLog<br>
ADM<br>
ADMD<br>
admin<br>
Administration Management Domain<br>
administrative distance<br>
Administrative Domain<br>
admissible<br>
Adobe Systems, Inc.<br>
Adobe Type Manager<br>
ADPCM<br>
ADS<br>
ADSL<br>
ADSP<br>
ADSU<br>
ADT<br>
Advanced Communication Function/Network Control Program<br>
Advanced Communications Function<br>
Advanced Computing Environment<br>
Advanced Configuration and Power Interface -- DONE<br>
Advanced Data Communications Control Protocol<br>
Advanced Encryption Standard<br>
Advanced Function Presentation<br>
Advanced Function Printing<br>
Advanced Intelligent Tape<br>
Advanced Interactive eXecutive<br>
Advanced Micro Devices, Inc.<br>
Advanced Network Systems Architecture<br>
Advanced Peer-to-Peer Networking<br>
Advanced Power Management -- DONE<br>
Advanced Program-to-Program Communications<br>
Advanced Research Projects Agency<br>
Advanced Research Projects Agency Network<br>
Advanced Revelation<br>
Advanced RISC Computing Specification<br>
Advanced RISC Machine DONE, renamed Acorn RISC Machine and moved to ARM Ltd<br>
Advanced RISC Machines Ltd. DONE, renamed Advanced RISC Machines and merged with ARM Ltd<br>
Advanced SCSI Peripheral Interface<br>
Advanced Software Environment<br>
Advanced STatistical Analysis Program<br>
Advanced Technology Attachment<br>
Advanced Technology Attachment Interface with Extensions<br>
Advanced WavEffect<br>
ADVENT<br>
Adventure Definition Language<br>
ADVSYS<br>
AE<br>
ae<br>
AED<br>
AEGIS<br>
Aegis<br>
Aeolus<br>
AEP<br>
aeroplane rule<br>
AES<br>
AESOP<br>
af<br>
AFAC<br>
AFAIK<br>
affine transformation<br>
affordance<br>
AFIPS<br>
AFJ<br>
AFK<br>
aflex<br>
AFNOR<br>
AFP<br>
AFS<br>
AFUU<br>
ag<br>
agent<br>
aggregate type<br>
aggregation<br>
AGL<br>
AGM Theory for Belief Revision<br>
AGORA<br>
AGP -- DONE<br>
AGP graphics<br>
A Hardware Programming Language<br>
AHDL<br>
AHPL<br>
AI<br>
ai<br>
AIA<br>
AI-complete<br>
AID<br>
AIDA<br>
AIDS<br>
AIDX<br>
AIFF<br>
AI International<br>
AI koan<br>
AIMACO<br>
Aimnet<br>
AIR<br>
AIr MAterial COmmand compiler<br>
airplane rule<br>
AIT<br>
AIX<br>
AKC<br>
AKCL<br>
A. K. Erlang<br>
AKL<br>
AL<br>
al<br>
Aladdin Systems<br>
ALADIN<br>
ALAM<br>
Alan F. Shugart<br>
A-language<br>
A Language Encouraging Program Hierarchy<br>
A Language for Attributed Definitions<br>
A Language with an Extensible Compiler<br>
Alan Kay<br>
Alan M. Turing<br>
Alan Shugart<br>
Alan Turing<br>
A-law<br>
ALC<br>
Alcool-90<br>
ALCOR<br>
Aldat<br>
ALDES<br>
ALDiSP<br>
ALEC<br>
ALEF<br>
ALEPH<br>
Aleph<br>
aleph 0<br>
alert<br>
Alex<br>
Alexis<br>
ALF<br>
Alfl<br>
algebra<br>
ALGEBRAIC<br>
algebraic<br>
algebraic data type DONE<br>
Algebraic Interpretive Dialogue<br>
Algebraic Logic Functional language<br>
Algebraic Manipulation Package<br>
Algebraic Specification Language<br>
algebraic structure<br>
Algebra of Communicating Processes<br>
ALGOL<br>
ALGOL 58<br>
ALGOL 60<br>
ALGOL 60 Modified<br>
ALGOL 60 Revised<br>
ALGOL 68<br>
ALGOL 68C<br>
ALGOL 68-R<br>
ALGOL 68 Revised<br>
ALGOL 68RS<br>
ALGOL 68S<br>
ALGOL C<br>
ALGOL D<br>
ALGOL N<br>
ALGOL W<br>
ALGOL X<br>
ALGOL Y<br>
algorithim<br>
algorithm<br>
ALgorithm DEScription<br>
ALgorIthmic ASsembly language<br>
Algorithmic Language<br>
Algorithmic Model<br>
Algorithmic Processor Description Language<br>
Algorithmic Test Case Generation<br>
ALGY<br>
ALIAS<br>
alias<br>
aliasing<br>
aliasing bug<br>
Alice<br>
alife<br>
A-Life<br>
ALJABR<br>
Allegro<br>
all-elbows<br>
ALLIANCE<br>
ALLOY<br>
ALM<br>
Aloha DONE (same as below)<br>
Aloha Net DONE<br>
Alonzo Church<br>
ALP<br>
ALPAK<br>
ALPHA<br>
Alpha<br>
Alpha AXP 21164<br>
alpha/beta pruning<br>
alpha conversion<br>
Alpha EV6<br>
Alpha Geek<br>
alphanumeric<br>
alpha particle<br>
Alphard<br>
alpha testing<br>
ALPS<br>
alt<br>
ALTAC<br>
Altair 8800<br>
Altair 9000<br>
Alta Vista<br>
alt bit<br>
Alternating bit protocol<br>
altmode<br>
ALTRAN<br>
alt.sources<br>
ALU<br>
Aluminum Book<br>
Alvey<br>
AM<br>
am<br>
Amanda<br>
A Manufacturing Language<br>
amateur packet radio<br>
Amber<br>
AMBIT<br>
AMBIT/G<br>
AMBIT/L<br>
AMBIT/S<br>
AMBUSH<br>
AMD<br>
AMD 29000<br>
AMD 29027<br>
Amdahl<br>
Amdahl Corporation<br>
Amdahl's Law<br>
AMD Am2901<br>
AMD Am2903<br>
AMD Am2910<br>
AMD K7<br>
American National Standard<br>
American National Standards Institute<br>
American Society of Mechanical Engineers<br>
American Standard Code for Information Interchange DONE -- redirects to ASCII<br>
American Telephone and Telegraph, Inc.<br>
American Wire Gauge<br>
America On-Line, Inc.<br>
America's Multimedia Online<br>
AMI<br>
Amiga<br>
Amiga E<br>
Aminet<br>
AML<br>
AML/E<br>
AMO<br>
Amoeba<br>
AMP<br>
amper<br>
ampersand<br>
AMPL<br>
AMPLE DONE<br>
Amplitude Modulation<br>
amp off<br>
AMPPL-II<br>
AMS<br>
AMTRAN<br>
Amulet<br>
an<br>
analog<br>
Analog Hardware Design Language<br>
analogue<br>
analogue computer<br>
Analogy Model<br>
Analytical Engine<br>
Analytical Machine<br>
anchor<br>
ANCP<br>
AND<br>
ANDF<br>
Andorra-I<br>
Andorra Kernel Language<br>
Andorra-Prolog<br>
Andrei Markov<br>
Andrew File System<br>
Andrew Fluegelman<br>
Andrew Message System<br>
Andrew Project<br>
Andrew S. Tanenbaum<br>
Andrew Tanenbaum<br>
Andrew Toolkit<br>
Andy Tanenbaum<br>
An Evolutionary System for On-line Programming<br>
Angel<br>
angle bracket<br>
angry fruit salad<br>
ANI<br>
Animated GIF<br>
animation<br>
Animus<br>
ANL<br>
Anna<br>
annealing<br>
annotate<br>
ANNotated Ada<br>
annotation<br>
annoybot<br>
annoyware<br>
Annual Change Traffic<br>
annulled branch<br>
anonymous FTP<br>
ANother Tool for Language Recognition<br>
ANR<br>
ANS<br>
ANSA<br>
ANSI<br>
ANSI C<br>
ANSI Minimal BASIC<br>
ANSI/SPARC<br>
ANSI/SPARC Architecture<br>
ANSI/SPARC model<br>
ANSI X12<br>
ANSI Z39.50<br>
Anthony Hoare<br>
anti-aliasing<br>
antichain<br>
antisymmetric<br>
antivirus software<br>
ANTLR<br>
ANU<br>
ANU ML<br>
anytime algorithm -- DONE<br>
ao<br>
AOCE<br>
AOL<br>
AOP<br>
AOS<br>
APA<br>
Apache<br>
APAL<br>
APAREL<br>
A PArse REquest Language<br>
APC<br>
APDL<br>
apE<br>
API<br>
APIC<br>
APL<br>
APL2<br>
APLGOL<br>
APLWEB<br>
APM -- DONE<br>
Apollo Computer<br>
apostrophe<br>
app<br>
APPC<br>
AppKit<br>
APPLE<br>
Apple Attachment Unit Interface<br>
Apple Computer, Inc.<br>
Apple II<br>
Apple Macintosh<br>
Apple Newton<br>
Apple Open Collaboration Environment<br>
AppleScript<br>
Applesoft BASIC<br>
applet<br>
Appletalk<br>
AppleTalk Data Stream Protocol<br>
AppleTalk Filing Protocol<br>
application<br>
Application Binary Interface<br>
Application Configuration Access Protocol<br>
Application Control Architecture<br>
application enablement services<br>
Application environment specification<br>
Application Executive<br>
Application Integration Architecture<br>
application layer<br>
Application Portability Architecture<br>
application program<br>
Application Program Interface<br>
Application Programming Interface<br>
Application Protocol Data Unit<br>
application server<br>
Application Service Element<br>
application service provider<br>
applications language<br>
application software<br>
Application Software Installation Server<br>
Application-Specific Integrated Circuit<br>
Applications Programming Interface<br>
applications software<br>
Application Visualisation System<br>
applicative language<br>
Applicative Language for Digital Signal Processing<br>
applicative order reduction<br>
APPLOG<br>
APPN<br>
approximation algorithm<br>
April Fool's Joke<br>
A Programming Language<br>
APSE<br>
APT<br>
APX III<br>
aq<br>
AQL<br>
ar<br>
arbitrary precision calculator<br>
ARC<br>
arc<br>
Arcade<br>
ArchBSD<br>
Archie<br>
Archimedes<br>
architecture<br>
Architecture Neutral Distribution Format<br>
archive<br>
archive site<br>
ARCnet DONE<br>
ARCS<br>
Arctic<br>
arena<br>
ARES<br>
AREV<br>
AREXX<br>
arg<br>
argument<br>
Argus<br>
Ariel<br>
ARI Service<br>
ARITH-MATIC<br>
Arithmetic and Logic Unit<br>
arity<br>
arj<br>
Arjuna<br>
ARL<br>
ARM DONE<br>
ARM610<br>
ARM7<br>
ARM710<br>
ARM7500<br>
ARM8<br>
ARM800<br>
ARM Ltd<br>
ARMM<br>
armour-plated<br>
ARP<br>
ARPA<br>
ARPANET<br>
ARQ<br>
array<br>
array processor<br>
Array Processor Assembly Language<br>
Array Theory<br>
arrow key<br>
ART<br>
Artemis microkernel<br>
Artifex<br>
artificial intelligence<br>
Artificial Intelligence Lab<br>
Artificial Life<br>
artificial neural network<br>
Artisoft, Inc.<br>
Artistic license<br>
ARTSPEAK<br>
AS<br>
as<br>
as31<br>
AS400<br>
AS/400<br>
ASA<br>
asap<br>
asbestos<br>
asbestos cork award<br>
asbestos longjohns<br>
ascender<br>
ASCII<br>
ASCII art<br>
ASCIIbetical order<br>
ASCIIbonics<br>
ASCII character table<br>
ASCII graphics<br>
ASDIMPL<br>
ASDL<br>
ASDO IMPlementation Language<br>
ASE<br>
A* search<br>
ASF<br>
ash<br>
Ashmedai<br>
Ashton-Tate Corporation<br>
ASIC<br>
A Simulation Process-Oriented Language<br>
ASIS<br>
ASK<br>
ASL<br>
ASL+<br>
ASM<br>
ASME<br>
ASN<br>
ASN.1<br>
ASP<br>
ASPECT<br>
ASpecT<br>
aspect<br>
aspect-oriented programming<br>
aspect ratio<br>
ASPEN<br>
ASPI<br>
ASPIK<br>
Aspirin<br>
ASPLE<br>
ASPOL<br>
ASQC<br>
ASR<br>
assembler<br>
ASSEMBLY<br>
assembly code<br>
Assembly Language<br>
assembly language<br>
Assembly Language Compiler<br>
Assembly Language for Multics<br>
assertion<br>
ASSET<br>
asset management<br>
Asset Source for Software Engineering Technology<br>
assigned numbers<br>
assignment<br>
assignment problem - NO IMPORT, assignment problem is now written from scratch<br>.
Association Control Service Element<br>
Association for Computational Linguistics<br>
Association for Computing<br>
Association for Computing Machinery<br>
Association for Progressive Communications<br>
Association for SIMULA Users<br>
Association Française des Utilisateurs d'Unix<br>
Association of American Publishers<br>
Association of C and C++ Users<br>
Association of Lisp Users<br>
associative array<br>
associative memory<br>
Associative Memory Parallel Processing Language<br>
AST<br>
ASTAP<br>
AST Computers, LLC<br>
asterisk<br>
asterix<br>
Astral<br>
AST Research, Inc.<br>
asymmetrical modulation<br>
Asymmetric Digital Subscriber Line<br>
Asymmetric Digital Subscriber Loop<br>
asynchronous<br>
Asynchronous Balanced Mode<br>
Asynchronous Communications Interface Adapter<br>
asynchronous logic<br>
Asynchronous Transfer Mode<br>
asyncronous<br>
AT DONE<br>
at<br>
AT-3<br>
ATA<br>
ATA-2<br>
ATA-4<br>
ATAPI<br>
Atari DONE<br>
AT Attachment<br>
AT Attachment Packet Interface<br>
AT bus architecture -- DONE<br>
AtFS<br>
Athena<br>
Atherton Technology<br>
Athlon<br>
ATIS<br>
ATK<br>
ATLAS<br>
Atlas Autocode<br>
ATM<br>
ATM Forum<br>
ATMP<br>
atob<br>
ATOLL<br>
atomic<br>
A Tools Integration Standard<br>
ATRAC<br>
ATS<br>
at sign<br>
AT&T<br>
Attachment Unit Interface<br>
AT&T Bell Labs<br>
atto-<br>
attoparsec<br>
attribute<br>
Attributed File System<br>
Attribute Translation System<br>
ATX<br>
au<br>
aubergine<br>
audio<br>
audiographics<br>
audiographic teleconferencing<br>
Audio IFF<br>
AudioOne<br>
Audio Processing Technology<br>
Audio Video Interleave<br>
Augmented Backus-Naur Form<br>
AUI<br>
A'UM<br>
AUP<br>
Aurora<br>
Austin Kyoto Common Lisp<br>
authentication<br>
authoring<br>
autobaud<br>
autobogotiphobia<br>
AutoCAD<br>
Autocode<br>
AUTOCODER<br>
Autodesk, Inc.<br>
AUTOEXEC.BAT<br>
AUTOGRAF<br>
AUTOGRP<br>
Auto Idle<br>
AutoLISP -- DONE<br>
autoloader<br>
automagically<br>
automata<br>
automata theory<br>
Automated Engineering Design<br>
AUTOmated GRouPing system<br>
Automated Retroactive Minimal Moderation<br>
automated testing<br>
AUTOMATH<br>
Automatically Programmed Tools<br>
automatic baud rate detection<br>
automatic hyphenation<br>
Automatic Mathematical TRANslation<br>
Automatic Network Routing<br>
Automatic Number Identification<br>
Automatic Repeat Request<br>
Automatic Send Receive<br>
Automatic Sequence Controlled Calculator<br>
automation<br>
Automatische Rechenplanfertigung<br>
automaton<br>
Automatrix, Inc.<br>
Autonomous System<br>
Autonomous System Number<br>
Autopass<br>
autoprojector<br>
AUTO-PROMPT<br>
Autostat<br>
autostereogram<br>
A/UX<br>
auxiliary storage<br>
av<br>
availability<br>
Avalon/C++<br>
Avalon/Common LISP<br>
avatar<br>
average seek time<br>
AVI<br>
Avon<br>
AVS<br>
aw<br>
AWE<br>
AWG<br>
awk<br>
AWT<br>
aXe<br>
AXIOM<br>
axiom<br>
AXIOM*<br>
Axiomatic Architecture Description Language<br>
axiomatic semantics<br>
axiomatic set theory<br>
Axiom of Choice<br>
Axiom of Comprehension<br>
AXLE<br>
ayacc<br>
AYT<br>
az<br>
AZERTY<br>
B<br>
b<br>
B-0<br>
B1FF<br>
B1 security<br>
B2B<br>
B2 security<br>
B3 security<br>
b4<br>
ba<br>
Baan<br>
Babbage<br>
]Babbage, Charles<br>
babbling error<br>
BABEL<br>
BABT<br>
Baby AT<br>
BABYLON<br>
BACAIC<br>
Bachman<br>
Bachman Information Systems<br>
backbone<br>
backbone cabal<br>
backbone site<br>
back door<br>
back-end<br>
Back End Generator<br>
Back End Generator Language<br>
backgammon<br>
background<br>
backing store<br>
back link<br>
backoff<br>
BackOffice<br>
back-propagation<br>
back quote<br>
backside cache<br>
backslash<br>
backtick<br>
backtracking<br>
backup<br>
backup pumpkin<br>
Backus-Naur Form<br>
Backus Normal Form<br>
backward analysis<br>
backward chaining<br>
backward compatibility<br>
backward compatible<br>
backwards compatibility<br>
backwards compatible<br>
BAD<br>
Bad command or file name<br>
Bad Thing<br>
bag on the side<br>
BAL<br>
balanced computing<br>
balanced tree<br>
BALGOL<br>
BALITAC<br>
BALM<br>
balun<br>
bamf<br>
Banach algebra<br>
Banach inverse mapping theorem<br>
Banach space<br>
Banach-Tarski paradox<br>
banana label<br>
banana problem<br>
bandwidth<br>
bang<br>
bang on<br>
bang path<br>
banner<br>
Banyan<br>
BAP<br>
BAPI<br>
bar<br>
bar code<br>
bare metal<br>
barf<br>
barfmail<br>
barfulation<br>
barfulous<br>
barney<br>
Baroque<br>
baroque<br>
barrel shifter -- DONE<br>
base<br>
base 64<br>
baseband<br>
base class<br>
baseline<br>
base memory<br>
basename<br>
Base Technology<br>
bash<br>
BASIC<br>
Basic Assembly Language<br>
BASIC AUTOCODER<br>
Basic COBOL<br>
Basic Encoding Rules<br>
Basic Fortran<br>
Basic Input/Output System<br>
Basic JOVIAL<br>
Basic Language for Implementation of System Software<br>
Basic Multilingual Plane<br>
Basic Object System<br>
Basic Operating System<br>
Basic Programming Support<br>
Basic Rate Interface<br>
BASIC V<br>
Bastard Operator From Hell<br>
bastion host<br>
batch file<br>
batch processing<br>
bathtub curve<br>
baud<br>
baud barf<br>
Baudot<br>
Baudotbetical order<br>
Baudot code<br>
baud rate<br>
bawk<br>
bay<br>
baz<br>
bb<br>
BBC<br>
BBC Microcomputer<br>
BBC Networking Club<br>
BBL<br>
BBN<br>
bboard<br>
BBS<br>
BC<br>
BCBF<br>
BCC<br>
BCD<br>
BCL<br>
BC NELIAC<br>
BCNU<br>
BCPL<br>
BCS<br>
bd<br>
BDC<br>
BDL<br>
BDPA<br>
be<br>
BEA<br>
beam<br>
beamer<br>
beam search<br>
bean<br>
beanie key<br>
bearer channel<br>
bear paw<br>
Beats the shit outa me<br>
BeBOP<br>
BeBox<br>
BEDO<br>
Bedrock<br>
beep<br>
beeper<br>
BEG<br>
@Begin<br>
BEGL<br>
beige toaster<br>
Be Inc<br>
BEL<br>
belief revision<br>
BELL<br>
Bell<br>
bell<br>
Bell 103<br>
Bell Communications Research, Inc<br>
Bellcore<br>
bell curve<br>
Bell Laboratories<br>
Bell Labs<br>
bells and whistles<br>
bells, whistles, and gongs<br>
benchmark<br>
Bend Over, Here It Comes Again<br>
Benoit B. Mandelbrot<br>
Benoit Mandelbrot<br>
Bentley Systems, Inc.<br>
BeOS<br>
BER<br>
Berkeley<br>
Berkeley 4.2<br>
Berkeley EDIF200<br>
Berkeley FP<br>
Berkeley Internet Name Domain<br>
Berkeley Logo<br>
Berkeley Network<br>
Berkeley Quality Software<br>
Berkeley Software Design, Inc<br>
Berkeley Softworks<br>
Berkeley System Distribution<br>
Berkeley Unix<br>
Berkeley Yacc<br>
berklix<br>
Berners-Lee, Tim<br>
Bernoulli Box<br>
Bernoulli principle<br>
Bernstein condition<br>
BERR<br>
Bertrand<br>
Bertrand Meyer<br>
Bertrand Russell<br>
Berzerkeley<br>
Berzerkley<br>
best effort<br>
best first search<br>
Best Fit<br>
BETA<br>
beta<br>
beta abstraction<br>
beta conversion<br>
Betamaxed<br>
beta reduction<br>
beta testing<br>
beta version<br>
Bezier<br>
Bezier curve<br>
Bezier surface<br>
bf<br>
BFI<br>
bg<br>
bgh<br>
BGP<br>
bh<br>
BHC Code<br>
bi<br>
bib<br>
bible<br>
BIBOP<br>
BibTeX<br>
BiCapitalisation<br>
BiCMOS<br>
bidirectional printing<br>
Bidouilleurs Sans Argent<br>
bi-endian<br>
BIFF<br>
biff<br>
Big bag of pages<br>
big blue<br>
big-endian<br>
Big Gray Wall<br>
big iron<br>
BIG-LAN<br>
Bigloo<br>
bignum<br>
bigot<br>
Big Red Switch<br>
Big Room<br>
big win<br>
bijection<br>
Bill Gates<br>
Bill Joy<br>
binaries<br>
binary<br>
Binary Coded Decimal<br>
Binary Compatibility Standard<br>
binary counter<br>
binary exponential backoff<br>
binary file<br>
binary large object<br>
binary package<br>
binary search<br>
Binary Synchronous Transmission -- DONE<br>
binary tree<br>
BIND<br>
bindery<br>
binding handle<br>
binding-time analysis<br>
BinHex<br>
Binhex 4.0<br>
BinProlog<br>
BIOR<br>
BIOS<br>
BIP<br>
bipartite graph<br>
bipolar<br>
bipolar transistor<br>
BIPS<br>
Bird-Meertens Formalism<br>
Birds Of a Feather<br>
BISDN<br>
Bison<br>
Bison++<br>
BIST<br>
bisync<br>
bit<br>
bit bang<br>
bit bashing<br>
bitblt<br>
bit bucket<br>
bit decay<br>
bit diddling<br>
bite<br>
bitmap<br>
bitmap display<br>
bitmap font<br>
bitmapped display<br>
bit mask<br>
BITNET<br>
bitonal image<br>
bit-paired keyboard<br>
bit pattern<br>
bit plane<br>
bit-robbing<br>
bit rot<br>
bit slice<br>
bits per inch<br>
bits per pixel<br>
bits per second<br>
bit string<br>
bit stuffing<br>
bit twiddling<br>
bitty box<br>
bitwise<br>
bitwise complement<br>
bixie<br>
bj<br>
Bjarne Stroustrup<br>
BJC4000<br>
black art<br>
black box<br>
black-box testing<br>
Black Data Processing Associates<br>
black hole<br>
black magic<br>
blargh<br>
blast<br>
blat<br>
BLAZE<br>
BLAZE 2<br>
bleam<br>
bleeper<br>
bletcherous<br>
Bletchley Park<br>
Blind Carbon Copy<br>
B-LINE<br>
blinkenlights<br>
BLISS<br>
BLISS-10<br>
BLISS-11<br>
BLISS-32<br>
blit<br>
blitter<br>
blivet<br>
bloat<br>
bloatware<br>
BLOB<br>
block<br>
Block Diagram Compiler<br>
blocked records<br>
Block Redundancy Check<br>
Block Started by Symbol<br>
block transfer computations<br>
Bloggs Family, the<br>
Blosim<br>
blow an EPROM<br>
blow away<br>
blowing your buffer<br>
blow out<br>
blow past<br>
blow up<br>
BLOX<br>
BLT<br>
Blue<br>
Blue Book<br>
Blue Box<br>
Blue Glue<br>
Blue Screen of Death<br>
Blue Screen of Life<br>
Blue Sky Software<br>
Bluetooth <br>
blue wire<br>
blurgle<br>
bm<br>
BMAN<br>
BMASF<br>
BMDP<br>
B-Method<br>
BMF<br>
BMP<br>
bmp<br>
BMWF<br>
bn<br>
BNC<br>
BNF<br>
BNR Pascal<br>
BNR Prolog<br>
bo<br>
boa<br>
board<br>
boat anchor<br>
Bob<br>
Bobo the Webmonkey<br>
BOCS<br>
Boehm B.<br>
BOEING<br>
BOF<br>
BOFH<br>
bogometer<br>
BogoMips<br>
bogon<br>
bogon filter<br>
bogon flux<br>
bogosity<br>
bogo-sort<br>
bogotify<br>
bogue out<br>
bogus<br>
BOHICA<br>
Bohr bug<br>
boink<br>
BOLERO<br>
Bolt, Beranek and Newman, Inc.<br>
bomb<br>
bon<br>
bondage-and-discipline language<br>
bonk/oif<br>
Booch method -- DONE<br>
bookmark<br>
Bookreader<br>
book titles<br>
Bookviewer<br>
bool<br>
Boolean<br>
Boolean algebra<br>
Boolean logic<br>
Boolean search<br>
Boole, George<br>
Booster<br>
boot<br>
boot block<br>
boot disk<br>
BOOTP<br>
bootstrap<br>
bootstrap loader<br>
boot virus<br>
Border Gateway Protocol<br>
borf<br>
Borland International, Inc.<br>
BOS<br>
Bose-Chaudhuri-Hocquenghem Code<br>
BOSS<br>
bot<br>
botmaster<br>
bottom<br>
bottom feeder<br>
bottom-unique<br>
bottom-up implementation<br>
bottom-up model<br>
bottom-up testing<br>
botwar<br>
bounce<br>
bounce message<br>
boundary scan<br>
boundary value analysis<br>
bounded<br>
boundedly complete<br>
bound variable<br>
bournebasic<br>
Bourne shell<br>
boustrophedonic<br>
box<br>
boxed comments<br>
boxen<br>
Boxer<br>
boxology<br>
Boycott Apple<br>
bozotic<br>
BPI<br>
bpmake<br>
bpp<br>
BPR<br>
BPS<br>
BQS<br>
br<br>
brace<br>
bracket<br>
bracket abstraction<br>
braille<br>
braille display<br>
Braille embosser<br>
Braille printer<br>
Brain Aid Prolog<br>
brain-damaged<br>
brain-dead<br>
brain dump<br>
brain fart<br>
braino<br>
branch<br>
Branch and Hang<br>
branch coverage testing<br>
branch delay slot -- DONE<br>
Branch on Chip Box Full<br>
branch prediction<br>
Branch Target Buffer<br>
branch to Fishkill<br>
Brazil<br>
BRB<br>
bread crumbs<br>
breadth first search<br>
break<br>
break-even point<br>
breakpoint<br>
breath-of-life packet<br>
breedle<br>
BRH<br>
BRI<br>
Brian Reid<br>
BRIDGE<br>
bridge<br>
Bridgetalk<br>
briefcase<br>
brightness<br>
Brilliant<br>
bring X to its knees<br>
British Broadcasting Corporation<br>
British Library Method<br>
British Standards Institute<br>
British Telecom<br>
British Telecom Research Laboratories<br>
brittle<br>
broadband<br>
broadcast<br>
broadcast quality video<br>
broadcast storm<br>
Broadway<br>
brochureware<br>
broken<br>
broken arrow<br>
broker<br>
broket<br>
Brooks's Law<br>
brouter<br>
Brouwer Fixed-Point Theorem<br>
Brown and Sharpe Wire Gauge<br>
brown paper bag bug<br>
browser<br>
BRS<br>
BRUIN<br>
brute force<br>
brute force and ignorance<br>
brute force attack<br>
BS<br>
bs<br>
BS2000<br>
BSA<br>
BSD<br>
BSD386<br>
BSDI<br>
BSD/OS<br>
BSD Unix<br>
BSI<br>
BSL<br>
BSOD<br>
BSOL<br>
BSOM<br>
BSP method<br>
BSRAM<br>
BSS<br>
BST<br>
bt<br>
BTB<br>
btoa<br>
B-Toolkit<br>
BTOS<br>
B-tree<br>
Btrieve - largely done, still more to go however. - 02:50, 9 Dec 2004 (UTC)<br>
Btrieve Technologies, Inc. - DONE redirected to Btrieve <br>
BTRL<br>
BTW<br>
BUAF<br>
BUAG<br>
bubble memory<br>
bubble sort<br>
bucky bits<br>
buffer<br>
buffered write-through<br>
buffer overflow<br>
bug<br>
bug-compatible<br>
bug fix<br>
bug fix release<br>
bug-for-bug compatible<br>
buglix<br>
BUGSYS<br>
built-in<br>
Built-in Self Test<br>
Bull<br>
bulletin board<br>
bulletin board system<br>
bulletproof<br>
Bull Information Systems<br>
bum<br>
bump<br>
burble<br>
Burge's Language<br>
buried treasure<br>
burn-in<br>
burn-in period<br>
Burroughs Corporation<br>
Burst EDO<br>
Burst Extended Data Out DRAM<br>
burst page<br>
Burst Static Random Access Memory<br>
bus<br>
bus error<br>
Bush, Vannevar<br>
Business Application Programming Interface<br>
Business Process Re-engineering<br>
Business Software Alliance<br>
business to business<br>
bus master<br>
bus mastering<br>
bus network<br>
Busy Beaver<br>
busy-loop<br>
busy-wait<br>
Butterfly Common LISP<br>
Butterfly Scheme<br>
button<br>
buzz<br>
bv<br>
bw<br>
bwBASIC<br>
BWQ<br>
by<br>
byacc<br>
by hand<br>
Byte<br>
byte<br>
byte-code<br>
byte-code compiler<br>
byte-code interpreter<br>
byte compiler<br>
bytesexual<br>
Byzantine<br>
bz<br>
bzzzt, wrong<br>

</doc>
<doc id="11330" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11330" title="Wikipedia:Free On-line Dictionary of Computing/I - K">
Wikipedia:Free On-line Dictionary of Computing/I - K

i18n<br>
I2O<br>
i386<br>
i486<br>
i487<br>
i860<br>
IA<br>
IAB<br>
IAD<br>
IAL<br>
IAM<br>
IANA<br>
IANAL<br>
IAP<br>
I-APL<br>
IAR<br>
IAS<br>
IAW<br>
IBEX<br>
IBM<br>
IBM 1403<br>
IBM 1620 NO IMPORT<br>
IBM 1710 NO IMPORT<br>
IBM 2741<br>
IBM 3270<br>
IBM 360 NO IMPORT<br>
IBM 3720 NO IMPORT<br>
IBM 650 NO IMPORT<br>
IBM 704<br>
IBM 7040<br>
IBM 705<br>
IBM 709<br>
IBM 7090<br>
IBM 7094<br>
IBM 801<br>
IBM compatible<br>
IBM Customer Engineer<br>
IBM discount<br>
IBM PC -- DONE<br>
IBM PC AT<br>
IBM PCjr<br>
IBM PC XT<br>
IBM Systems Engineer<br>
Ibpag2<br>
Iburg<br>
IC<br>
ICAM<br>
I-CASE<br>
ICBM address<br>
ICE<br>
icebreaker<br>
ICES<br>
ICETRAN<br>
ICI<br>
ICL<br>
ICMP<br>
ICMP Router Discovery Protocol<br>
I-Comm<br>
iCOMP<br>
Icon DONE as either Unisys ICON or Icon programming language<br>
icon<br>
Iconicode<br>
ICONIX Software Engineering, Inc.<br>
IC-Prolog<br>
IC Prolog II<br>
ICQ<br>
ICSI<br>
ICT<br>
ICW<br>
ICWS<br>
Id<br>
id<br>
I-D<br>
IDAMS<br>
IDE<br>
IDEA<br>
IDEAL<br>
ideal<br>
Idealized CSP<br>
Idealized Instruction Set<br>
IDEF<br>
idempotent<br>
IDF<br>
I didn't change anything!<br>
IDL<br>
IDMS<br>
IDMSX<br>
Id Nouveau<br>
IDOL<br>
IDS/I<br>
id Software<br>
IDSS<br>
IE<br>
ie<br>
IEC<br>
IEC 559<br>
IEEE<br>
IEEE 1076<br>
IEEE 1394 -- DONE (renamed Firewire)<br>
IEEE 488<br>
IEEE 754<br>
IEEE 802<br>
IEEE 802.2 -- DONE<br>
IEEE 802.3<br>
IEEE 802.3u<br>
IEEE 802.3z<br>
IEEE 802.4<br>
IEEE 802.5<br>
IEEE Computer Society<br>
IEEE Floating Point Standard -- DONE<br>
IEEE Standard 1149.1<br>
IEF<br>
IEN<br>
IEPG<br>
IESG<br>
IETF<br>
IF1<br>
IF2<br>
IFAC<br>
ifdef out<br>
IFDL<br>
IFF<br>
IFIP<br>
IFP<br>
IFS<br>
IFX<br>
If you want X, you know where to find it.<br>
IGC<br>
IGES<br>
IGL<br>
IGMP<br>
IGP<br>
IGPL<br>
IGU<br>
IHS<br>
IHV<br>
IIcx<br>
IIDMS/R<br>
IINREN<br>
IIOP<br>
IIR<br>
IIRC<br>
IIS<br>
IIT<br>
IITF<br>
IITRAN<br>
il<br>
ILBM<br>
ILF<br>
ILIAD<br>
I-Link<br>
ILISP<br>
ill-behaved<br>
ILLIAC<br>
Illiac IV<br>
ILOC<br>
Ilog Solver<br>
image<br>
image formats<br>
image map<br>
image processing<br>
image recognition<br>
imaging<br>
Imago Europe plc<br>
Imago On-line<br>
imake<br>
IMAO<br>
IMAP<br>
imc<br>
IMD<br>
IMHO<br>
IML<br>
immediate version<br>
Imminent Death Of The Net Predicted!<br>
IMNSHO<br>
IMO<br>
IMP<br>
impact printer<br>
imperative language<br>
Imperial Software Technology<br>
IMPlementation language<br>
implicit parallelism<br>
implicit type conversion<br>
implies<br>
imprecise probability<br>
IMProved Mercury autocode<br>
IMR<br>
IMS<br>
IMS 6100<br>
Imsai<br>
IMS/Data Base<br>
IMS/Data Communications<br>
IMSE<br>
IMTC<br>
in<br>
Ina Jo<br>
InARP<br>
in-band<br>
inc<br>
incantation<br>
include<br>
include war<br>
inclusive<br>
incomparable<br>
incremental analysis<br>
incremental backup<br>
incremental constraint solver<br>
Incremental Prototyping Technology for Embedded Realtime Systems<br>
[incr Tcl]<br>
indel<br>
indent style<br>
Independent Logical File<br>
Independent Verification and Validation<br>
index<br>
Index Data<br>
Indexed Sequential Access Method<br>
indices<br>
indirect address<br>
indirect addressing<br>
indirection<br>
induction<br>
inductive inference<br>
inductive relation<br>
Industrial Programming, Inc.<br>
Industrial Robot Language<br>
Industry Standard Architecture -- DONE<br>
inetd<br>
inews<br>
infant mortality (computer)<br>
infeasible path<br>
inference<br>
inference engine<br>
inference rule<br>
infimum<br>
infinite<br>
Infinite Impulse Response<br>
infinite loop<br>
Infinite Monkey Theorem<br>
infinite set<br>
infinity<br>
infix notation<br>
infix syntax<br>
inflate<br>
INFN<br>
Infobahn<br>
Info BASIC<br>
infobot<br>
Informatics Corporation<br>
Information Algebra<br>
Information and Communication Technology<br>
Information Appliance<br>
Information Builders<br>
Information Engineering Facility<br>
information highway<br>
Information Innovation<br>
information island<br>
Information Management<br>
Information Management System<br>
Information Processing Language<br>
Information Resource Management<br>
information superhighway<br>
Information Systems Factory<br>
Information Technology<br>
Information Technology Infrastructure Library<br>
Informix<br>
InfoSeek<br>
InfoStreet, Inc.<br>
InfoWord Office<br>
infrared<br>
Infrared Data Association<br>
infrastructure<br>
Inglish<br>
INGRES<br>
inheritance<br>
initgame<br>
initialise<br>
Initial Microprogram Load<br>
Initial Operational Test and Evaluation<br>
Initial Program Load<br>
Initial Program Loader<br>
initiator<br>
injection<br>
inkjet printer<br>
ink printer<br>
inline<br> - DONE
inline image<br>
INMOS transputer<br>
inner join<br>
inner product<br>
InnovAda<br>
inode<br>
Inprise Corporation<br>
Input<br>
input<br>
input device<br>
input/output<br>
input/output redirection<br>
inquiry/response system<br>
INRIA<br>
insanely great<br>
insertion sort<br>
INSIGHT<br>
Insignia Solutions, Inc.<br>
inspection<br>
installable file system<br>
installed user base<br>
installer<br>
instance<br>
instance variable<br>
instantiate<br>
instantiation<br>
Institute for Global Communications<br>
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Inc.<br>
Institut National de Recherche en Informatique et Automatique<br>
Instruction Address Register<br>
instruction mnemonic<br>
instruction prefetch<br>
instruction scheduling<br>
instruction set<br>
instruction set architecture<br>
Instruction Set Processor<br>
instrument<br>
int<br>
INTCODE<br>
integer<br>
Integer SPECbaserate<br>
Integer SPECbaseratio<br>
Integer SPECrate<br>
Integer SPECratio<br>
integrated circuit<br>
Integrated Database Management System<br>
Integrated Drive Electronics<br>
Integrated Information Technology<br>
Integrated Modelling Support Environment<br>
Integrated Project Support Environment<br>
Integrated Services Digital Network<br>
Integrated Systems Architecture<br>
integration<br>
integration testing<br>
integrity constraint<br>
Intel 4004<br>
Intel 4040<br>
Intel 486<br>
Intel 486DX<br>
Intel 486SX<br>
Intel 487SX<br>
Intel 8008<br>
Intel 80186<br>
Intel 80188<br>
Intel 80286<br>
Intel 80386<br>
Intel 80386SX<br>
Intel 8048<br>
Intel 80486<br>
Intel 8051<br>
Intel 8080<br>
Intel 8085<br>
Intel 8086<br>
Intel 8088<br>
Intel 80x86<br>
Intel 8751<br>
Intel Comparative Microprocessor Performance index<br>
Intel Corporation<br>
IntelDX4<br>
Intel i960<br>
INTELLECT<br>
intellectual property<br>
intelligent backtracking<br>
intelligent database<br>
Intelligent Input/Output<br>
Intelligent I/O<br>
intelligent key<br>
intelligent terminal<br>
IntelliMouse<br>
Intel Literature Sales<br>
Intelsat<br>
intensional<br>
Intent to Package<br>
INTERACTIVE<br>
interactive<br>
Interactive CourseWare<br>
Interactive Data Entry/Access<br>
Interactive Data Language<br>
interactive development environment<br>
Interactive Development Environments<br>
Interactive Software Engineering<br>
Interactive System Productivity Facility<br>
Interactive Voice Response<br>
Interagency Interim National Research and Education Network<br>
InterBase<br>
INTERCAL<br>
Interchange File Format<br>
INTERCOM<br>
Interest Group in Pure and Applied Logics<br>
interesting<br>
interface<br>
interface analysis<br>
Interface Architect<br>
Interface Definition Language<br>
Interface Description Language<br>
Interface Message Processor<br>
Interior Gateway Protocol<br>
interlace<br>
interlaced image<br>
interlacing<br>
Interlan<br>
Interleaf<br>
interleave<br>
interleaving<br>
INTERLINK<br>
Interlisp<br>
Interlisp-10<br>
Interlisp-D<br>
Intermedia<br>
Intermedia Interchange Format<br>
Intermediate Distribution Frame<br>
Intermediate Programming Language<br>
Intermediate System<br>
Intermediate System-Intermediate System<br>
Intermetrics, Inc.<br>
intermodulation distortion<br>
internal field separators<br>
Internal Translator<br>
International Algebraic Language<br>
International Atomic Time<br>
International Business Machines<br>
International Computers Limited plc<br>
International Core War Society<br>
International Data Encryption Algorithm<br>
International Electrotechnical Commission<br>
International Federation for Information Processing<br>
International Function Point Users Group<br>
internationalisation<br>
internationalization<br>
International Multimedia Teleconferencing Consortium<br>
International Olympiad in Informatics<br>
International Organisation for Standardisation<br>
International Organization for Standardization<br>
International Phonetic Alphabet<br>
International Programmable Airline Reservation System<br>
International Smalltalk Association<br>
International Standard<br>
International Telecommunications Union<br>
International Traffic in Arms Regulation<br>
Internet<br>
internet<br>
Internet Access Provider<br>
Internet Adapter<br>
Internet address<br>
internet address<br>
Internet Architecture Board<br>
Internet Assigned Numbers Authority<br>
Internet backbone<br>
Internet Chess Server<br>
Internet Control Message Protocol<br>
Internet-Draft<br>
Internet Engineering and Planning Group<br>
Internet Engineering Steering Group<br>
Internet Engineering Task Force<br>
Internet Experiment Note<br>
Internet Explorer<br>
Internet Express<br>
Internet Go Server<br>
Internet Group Management Protocol<br>
Internet Information Server<br>
Internet Inter-ORB Protocol<br>
Internet Message Access Protocol<br>
Internet Monthly Report<br>
Internet Network Information Center<br>
internet number<br>
Internet Open Trading Protocol<br>
Internet Protocol<br>
Internet Protocol Control Protocol<br>
Internet Protocol version 4<br>
Internet Protocol version 6<br>
Internet Public Library<br>
Internet Registry<br>
Internet Relay Chat<br>
Internet Research Steering Group<br>
Internet Research Task Force<br>
Internet Security Association and Key Management Protocol<br>
Internet Server Application Programming Interface<br>
Internet Service Provider<br>
Internet Society<br>
Internet Telephony<br>
Internet Telephony Service Providers<br>
internetworking<br>
Internetwork Packet eXchange<br>
Internet Worm<br>
Internex On-Line<br>
InterNIC<br>
interoperability<br>
interoperable database<br>
inter-packet gap<br>
interpolation<br>
Interpress<br>
interpreted<br>
interpreter DONE<br>
Interpretive Menu Processor<br>
inter-process communication DONE<br>
interrupt<br>
interrupt handler<br>
interrupt list<br>
interrupt priority level<br>
interrupt request<br>
interrupts<br>
Intersil 6100<br>
Intersil 6120<br>
InterViews<br>
interworking<br>
intranet<br>
Intrinsics<br>
Intrusion Countermeasure Electronics<br>
Intrusive Testing<br>
Intuition<br>
intuitionism<br>
intuitionistic logic<br>
intuitionistic probability<br>
intuitionist logic<br>
invariant<br>
inverse<br>
Inverse Address Resolution Protocol<br>
inverted index<br>
InWorld VR<br>
io<br>
I/O<br>
IOI<br>
Iomega Corporation<br>
I-OOA<br>
I/O redirection<br>
IOS<br>
Iota<br>
IOT&amp<br>E<br>
IOW<br>
IP<br>
IPA<br>
IP address<br>
IPARS<br>
I-Pay<br>
IPC REDIRECT inter-process communication<br>
IPCP<br>
IPE<br>
IPL<br>
IP next generation<br>
IPng<br>
IP number<br>
IPS<br>
IPSE<br>
IPSec<br>
IPT<br>
IP Telephony<br>
IPv4<br>
IPv6<br>
IPX<br>
IPXCP<br>
IQ<br>
iq<br>
IQL<br>
IR<br>
ir<br>
IrBUS<br>
IRC<br>
ircop<br>
IRC penis war<br>
IrDA<br>
IrDA-C<br>
IrDA Control<br>
IrDA Data<br>
IRDATA<br>
IRDP<br>
IRDS<br>
IRET<br>
IRIS<br>
Iris<br>
IRIX<br>
IRL<br>
IRM<br>
iron<br>
Iron Age<br>
iron box<br>
Ironman<br>
ironmonger<br>
IRQ<br>
irrational number<br>
irrefutable<br>
IRSG<br>
IRTF<br>
IRUS<br>
Irvine Dataflow<br>
Irvine Research Unit in Software<br>
IS<br>
is<br>
IS-11172<br>
IS-13818<br>
ISA -- DONE (redirected to Industry Standard Architecture<br>
Isabelle<br>
Isabelle-92<br>
Isabelle-93<br>
ISA bus<br>
ISAKMP<br>
ISAM<br>
ISAPI<br>
ISAPI filter<br>
ISBL<br>
ISDE<br>
ISDN<br>
ISE<br>
ISEE<br>
I see no X here.<br>
ISETL<br>
ISF<br>
ISINDEX<br>
ISIS<br>
IS-IS<br>
ISL<br>
ISLisp<br>
ISMAP<br>
ISO<br>
ISO 10646<br>
ISO 8072<br>
ISO 8073<br>
ISO 8208<br>
ISO 8326<br>
ISO 8327<br>
ISO 8613<br>
ISO 8649<br>
ISO 8650<br>
ISO 8805<br>
ISO 8807<br>
ISO 8822<br>
ISO 8823<br>
ISO 8825<br>
ISO 8859<br>
ISO 8859-1<br>
ISO 8879<br>
ISO 9000<br>
ISO 9072<br>
ISO 9660<br>
ISO 9735<br>
ISOC<br>
ISO C<br>
isochronous<br>
isochronous transfer<br>
ISODE<br>
ISO Development Environment<br>
ISO/IEC 10646-1<br>
isolated<br>
ISO Latin 1<br>
isometry<br>
isomorphic<br>
isomorphism<br>
isomorphism class<br>
ISO Pascal<br>
ISO seven layer model<br>
ISP<br>
ISPBX<br>
ISPF<br>
ISPL<br>
ISPS<br>
IST<br>
ISTAR<br>
ISTM<br>
ISV<br>
ISWIM<br>
IT<br>
it<br>
ITAR<br>
Iterated Function System<br>
iteration<br>
iterative deepening<br>
Iternet<br>
ITHACA<br>
ITIL<br>
ITP<br>
ITS<br>
it's a feature<br>
ITSP<br>
ITU<br>
ITU-T<br>
ITU-T X.680<br>
ITU X.209<br>
Ivan<br>
Ivan Sutherland<br>
Iverson's Language<br>
IVR<br>
ivs<br>
IVTRAN<br>
IV&amp<br>V<br>
IVY<br>
IWay<br>
IWBNI<br>
IXC<br>
IXI Limited<br>
IXO<br>
IYFEG<br>
J<br>
J2EE<br>
J2ME<br>
J2SE<br>
J3<br>
J73<br>
jabber<br>
JACAL<br>
jaccl<br>
jack in<br>
Jack Kilby<br>
Jackson method<br>
Jacquard, Joseph-Marie<br>
Jacquard loom<br>
JAD<br>
JADE<br>
Jade<br>
jadeTeX<br>
JAffer's Canonical ALgebra<br>
jaggies<br>
JaM<br>
jam<br>
James Clark<br>
James' DSSSL Engine<br>
James Gosling<br>
James H. Clark<br>
JANET<br>
JANET IP Service<br>
Janus<br>
japh DONE (renamed Just another Perl hacker)<br>
jar<br>
Jargon File<br>
Java<br>
Java 2<br>
Java 2 Platform<br>
Java 2 Platform, Enterprise Edition<br>
Java 2 Platform, Micro Edition<br>
Java 2 Platform, Standard Edition<br>
Java 2 SDK<br>
Java 2 Software Development Kit<br>
Java archive<br>
JavaBeans<br>
Java Database Connectivity<br>
Java Development Kit<br>
Java Message Service<br>
Java Native Interface<br>
Java Open Language Toolkit<br>
Java Remote Method Protocol<br>
Java Run-Time Environment<br>
JavaScript<br>
Java servelet<br>
JavaServer Pages<br>
Java servlet<br>
Java Servlet Development Kit<br>
Java Virtual Machine<br>
Java VM<br>
JAZ<br>
Jaz<br>
Jaz Drive<br>
JAZELLE<br>
JBIG<br>
JBOD<br>
JBOPS<br>
jc<br>
JCL<br>
JCS-13<br>
JDBC<br>
JDK<br>
JEAN<br>
Jean E. Sammet<br>
JEDR<br>
Jef Raskin<br>
Jerry Sussman<br>
JES<br>
JES2<br>
JES3<br>
JFCL<br>
JFET<br>
JFIF<br>
jiffy<br>
Jim Clark<br>
Jini<br>
JIPS<br>
JIT<br>
jitter<br>
JK flip-flop<br>
jm<br>
JMHO<br>
JMS<br>
JNI<br>
jo<br>
job<br>
Job Control Language<br>
Job Entry System<br>
Jobs<br>
job security<br>
jock<br>
joe<br>
joe code<br>
John Gilmore<br>
John McCarthy<br>
John Ousterhout<br>
John von Neumann<br>
join<br>
Joint Academic NETwork<br>
Joint Bi-level Image Experts Group<br>
Joint Photographic Experts Group<br>
Joint Technical Committee<br>
Joint Test Action Group<br>
jolix<br>
JOLT<br>
Jon Postel<br>
JOOP<br>
Joseph-Marie Jacquard<br>
JOSS<br>
Jossle<br>
journalling<br>
jove<br>
JOVIAL<br>
Joyce<br>
joystick<br>
Joy, William<br>
jp<br>
JPEG<br>
JPEG File Interchange Format<br>
jpg<br>
JPL<br>
JPLDIS<br>
J. Presper Eckert<br>
J. Random<br>
J. Random Hacker<br>
JRE<br>
JRL<br>
JRMP<br>
JRN<br>
JRST<br>
JS<br>
JSA<br>
JSDK<br>
JSP<br>
JTAGDONE<br>
JTB<br>
JTC<br>
JTC1/SC24<br>
JTS<br>
juggling eggs<br>
Jughead<br>
jukebox<br>
jump<br>
jumper<br>
jump off into never-never land<br>
jump trace buffer<br>
Junction FET<br>
Junction Field Effect Transistor<br>
Juno<br>
jupiter<br>
Just a Bunch Of Disks<br>
just-in-time<br>
JVM<br>
Jym<br>
K<br>
K5<br>
K56flex<br>
K6 DONE<br>
K7 DONE<br>
KA9Q DONE<br>
KADS DONE<br>
kahuna NO not in FOLDOC<br>
Kaleidoscope<br>
Kali<br>
kamikaze packet DONE redirect<br>
Kamin's interpreters<br>
kana<br>
kangaroo code DONE<br>
kanji<br>
KAOS DONE<br>
KAP<br>
Karel<br>
katakana<br>
Kb<br>
KBMS No too little info<br>
kbps<br>
KBS<br>
KCL<br>
ke<br>
KEE<br>
Keldysh Institute of Applied Mathematics<br>
ken<br>
Ken Thompson<br>
Kerberos<br>
Kermit<br>
kernal<br>
kernel (computers)<br>
Kernel Parlog<br>
Kernel User Interface Package DONE <br>
kerning<br>
Kevo<br>
key<br>
keyboard<br>
Keyboard Commando DONE <br>
keyboard plaque DONE <br>
Keyboard Send Receive DONE <br>
Keyed-Hashing Message Authentication DONE <br>
Keyed Sequential Data Set DONE <br>
key escrow DONE <br>
key field DONE <br>
key frame DONE <br>
KeyNote Software NO a company, little info<br>
keypal DONE <br>
KeySpell DONE <br>
keyword DONE <br>
KFX DONE <br>
kg NO country code<br>
kgbvax DONE redirect<br>
kh NO country code<br>
Khornerstone<br>
ki NO country code<br>
KIBO DONE <br>
kiboze DONE <br>
kick<br>
Kid DONE <br>
KIDASA Software NO limited company info<br>
killer micro DONE <br>
killer poke DONE <br>
kill file DONE <br>
kilo- REDIRECT prefix<br>
kilobaud REDIRECT baud<br>
kilobit REDIRECT bit<br>
kilobyte<br>
kiloflops REDIRECT FLOPS<br>
kiosk DONE <br>
KIPS DONE <br>
KIS REDIRECT Knowbot Information Service<br>
KISS DONE <br>
KISS Principle DONE <br>
kit DONE <br>
KL0 DONE <br>
KL1 DONE <br>
Klamath DONE <br>
KLB REDIRECT Known Lazy Bastard<br>
Kleene closure REDIRECT Kleene star<br>
Kleene star<br>
Kleene, Stephen Cole DONE <br>
Klerer-May System DONE <br>
KLOC DONE <br>
klone REDIRECT clone<br>
KL-ONE DONE <br>
kludge<br>
kluge<br>
kluge around DONE <br>
km NO country code<br>
KMODEL DONE <br>
KMS REDIRECT Knowledge Management System<br>
kn NO country code<br>
knapsack problem -- DONE<br>
Knights of the Lambda-Calculus DONE <br>
knowbot DONE <br>
Knowbot Information Service DONE<br>
knowledge<br>
Knowledge Analysis and Design System<br>
knowledge base<br>
knowledge-based system<br>
knowledge level<br>
Knowledge Management System<br>
Knowledge Query and Manipulation Language<br>
knowledge representation<br>
Knowledge Sharing Effort<br>
Knowledge Systems Laboratory<br>
Known Lazy Bastard DONE<br>
Knuth DONE <br>
Kodak NO insufficient company info.<br>
Kohonen NO insufficient info for redirect.<br>
KOMPILER DONE <br>
Konrad Zuse<br>
Korn Shell DONE <br>
kp NO country code<br>
KQML REDIRECT Knowledge Query and Manipulation Language<br>
KR REDIRECT knowledge representation<br>
kr NO country code<br>
K and R DONE <br>
KRC DONE <br>
K and R C DONE <br>
kremvax DONE <br>
KRL DONE <br>
KRS DONE <br>
KRYPTON DONE <br>
ksh REDIRECT Korn Shell<br>
KSL REDIRECT Knowledge Systems Laboratory<br>
KSR DONE <br>
KTH REDIRECT Kungliga Tekniska Hogskolan<br>
KUIP REDIRECT Kernel User Interface Package<br>
Kungliga Tekniska Hogskolan<br>
KUTGW DONE <br>
Kvatro Telecom AS DONE <br>
Kvikkalkul<br>
kw NO country code<br>
ky NO country code<br>
Kyoto Common Lisp DONE <br>
kyrka REDIRECT feature key<br>
kz NO country code<br>

</doc>
<doc id="11331" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11331" title="Wikipedia:Free On-line Dictionary of Computing/L - N">
Wikipedia:Free On-line Dictionary of Computing/L - N

L0<br>
l10n<br>
L1 cache<br>
L2 cache<br>
L2TP<br>
L6<br>
la<br>
label edge router<br>
label switched path<br>
label switching<br>
Label Switching Router<br>
Lab for Computer Science<br>
Laboratory INstrument Computer<br>
Laboratory Virtual Instrument Engineering Workbench<br>
LaborNet<br>
Labtech Notebook<br>
LabVIEW<br>
Lace<br>
lace card<br>
LADY<br>
lag<br>
Lakota<br>
LALR<br>
lalr.ss<br>
Lambada-Calculus<br>
LAMBDA<br>
lambda abstraction<br>
lambda-calculus<br> DONE - merged into lambda calculus
lambda expression<br>
lambda lifting<br>
LambdaMOO<br>
Lambda-Prolog<br>
lamer<br>
LAMINA<br>
lamp-post error<br>
LAN<br>
LANCE<br>
language<br>
language-based editor<br>
Language for Communicating Systems<br>
Language H<br>
language lawyer<br>
Language Of Temporal Ordering Specification<br>
Language Sensitive Editor<br>
language-sensitive editor<br>
languages of choice<br>
Laning and Zierler<br>
LANL<br>
Lan Manager<br>
LANtastic<br>
LAP<br>
LAP4<br>
LAPB<br>
LAPD<br>
LAPM<br>
LAPSE<br>
laptop computer<br>
LaQuey<br>
Larch<br>
Larch/C++<br>
LARCH/CLU<br>
Large Installation Systems Administration<br>
Larry Wall<br>
LART<br>
larval stage<br>
lase<br>
laser printer<br>
Lasherism<br>
last call optimisation<br>
last-in first-out<br>
LAT<br>
latch<br>
latency<br>
LaTeX<br>
Latin 1<br>
lattice<br>
LAU<br>
laundromat<br>
LAURE<br>
LAVA<br>
law<br>
LAWN<br>
Lawrence Livermore Labs<br>
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory<br>
LAX<br>
layer<br>
Layer Two Tunneling Protocol<br>
laziness<br>
lazy evaluation<br>
lazy list<br>
Lazy SML<br>
lazy sml2c<br>
Lazy Standard ML<br>
lb<br>
LBA<br>
LBE<br>
LBL<br>
lc<br>
LCC<br>
lcc<br>
LCD<br>
LCF<br>
LCL<br>
lclint<br>
LCP<br>
LCS<br>
ld<br>
LDAP REDIRECT Lightweight Directory Access Protocol<br>
LDB<br>
LDL<br>
LDL1<br>
LDP<br>
LDT<br>
LE/1<br>
leading<br>
LEAF<br>
leaf<br>
Leaf Distribution Limited<br>
leaf site<br>
League for Programming Freedom<br>
leak<br>
leaky heap<br>
Lean<br>
LEAP<br>
leapfrog attack<br>
learning curve<br>
leased line<br>
least fixed point<br>
least recently used<br>
least significant bit<br>
least upper bound<br>
leaves<br>
LEC<br>
LECOM<br>
LED<br>
LEDA<br>
Leda<br>
LED page printer<br>
LED printer<br>
leet<br>
left arrow<br>
left brace<br>
left bracket<br>
left outer join<br>
left parenthesis<br>
LeFun<br>
legacy code<br>
legacy software<br>
legacy system -- DONE<br>
legal<br>
legalese<br>
LEGOL<br>
Le-Lisp<br>
lemma<br>
Lempel-Ziv compression<br>
Lempel-Ziv Welch compression<br>
Lenat, Doug<br>
lenient evaluation<br>
LEO<br>
Leo<br>
LER<br>
LERP<br>
less than<br>
LessTif<br>
let floating<br>
letterbomb<br>
level 1 cache<br>
level 2 cache<br>
LEVEL5 OBJECT<br>
level one cache<br>
level-sensitive scan design<br>
level two cache<br>
Lex<br>
lexeme<br>
lexer<br>
lexical analyser<br>
lexical analysis<br>
lexical scope<br>
lexical scoping<br>
lexiphage<br>
LF<br>
LG<br>
LGDF<br>
LGEN<br>
LGN<br>
lha<br>
LHARC<br>
lhs<br>
lhz<br>
li<br>
Liana<br>
Liar<br>
liar paradox<br>
libg++<br>
library<br>
Library of Efficient Data types and Algorithms<br>
librery<br>
LIDO<br>
LiE<br>
LIF<br>
LIFE<br>
Life<br>
life<br>
life-cycle<br>
Life is hard<br>
LIFIA<br>
LIFO<br>
lifted domain<br>
LIGHT<br>
light client<br>
light-emitting diode<br>
light-emitting resistor<br>
light pipe<br>
light-weight<br>
Lightweight Directory Access Protocol DONE<br>
light-weight process<br>
like kicking dead whales down the beach<br>
like nailing jelly to a tree<br>
like this<br>
Lila<br>
Lilith<br>
LILLIAC IV<br>
lilo<br>
Lily<br>
LIMDEP<br>
LIM EMS<br>
LIMP<br>
Linc (Laboratory Instrument Computer)<br>
Lincoln Reckoner<br>
LINCtape<br>
Linda<br>
LindaLISP<br>
line<br>
line 666<br>
linear address space<br>
linear argument<br>
linear assignment<br>
linear function<br>
Linear Graph Notation<br>
linear logic<br>
linear map<br>
linear programming<br>
linear space<br>
linear sweep<br>
linear transformation<br>
linear type<br>
line conditioning<br>
line eater<br>
line editor<br>
line feed<br>
line noise<br>
line printer<br>
line probing<br>
lines of code<br>
lines per minute<br>
line starve<br>
Lingo<br>
LINGOL<br>
link<br>
Link Access Procedure on the D channel<br>
Link Access Protocol Balanced<br>
Link Access Protocol for Modems<br>
Link Control Protocol<br>
link-dead<br>
linked list<br>
linker NO IMPORT<br>
link farm<br>
link rot<br>
links<br>
Link State Routing Protocol<br>
LINPACK<br>
lint<br>
Linux<br>
Linux Documentation Project<br>
Linux Network Administrators' Guide<br>
lion food<br>
Lions Book<br>
LIPL<br>
liquid crystal display<br>
LIS<br>
LISA<br>
Liskov substitution principle<br>
Lisp<br>
LISP 1<br>
LISP 1.5<br>
LISP 2<br>
LISP70<br>
LISP A<br>
LISP Extended Algebraic Facility<br>
Lispkit<br>
Lispkit Lisp<br>
Lisp-Linda<br>
Lisp Machine<br>
LISP Machine LISP<br>
Lisp Object-Oriented Programming System<br>
LISP, Objects, and Symbolic Programming<br>
Lisptalk<br>
LispView<br>
list<br>
list comprehension<br>
List Enhanced<br>
listless<br>
Listproc<br>
lists<br>
Listserv<br>
Liszt<br>
lite<br>
literal<br>
literate programming<br>
literature<br>
LITHE<br>
lithium lick<br>
LitProg<br>
LITTLE<br>
little-endian<br>
Little Smalltalk<br>
live data<br>
Live Free Or Die!<br>
livelock<br>
LiveScript<br>
liveware<br>
lk<br>
LL<br>
LLC<br>
LLGen<br>
LLM3<br>
LLNL<br>
LLP<br>
LM3<br>
LMAO<br>
LML<br>
LM-Prolog<br>
LMTP<br>
LNF<br>
LO<br>
L&amp<br>O<br>
load balancing<br>
lobotomy<br>
LOC<br>
local area network<br>
Local Area Transport<br>
local bus<br>
locale<br>
local echo<br>
localisation<br>
localised<br>
locality<br>
local loop<br>
local loopback addresses<br>
locals<br>
LocalTalk<br>
location<br>
locked and loaded<br>
locked up<br>
lock-in<br>
Locus<br>
Loebner Prize<br>
logarithmus dualis<br>
LogC<br>
logic<br>
logical<br>
logical address<br>
Logical Block Addressing<br>
logical complement<br>
Logical Link Control -- DONE<br>
logical relation<br>
logical shift<br>
logical shift left<br>
logical shift right<br>
Logical Unit<br>
Logical Unit 6.2<br>
Logical Unit Number<br>
logic bomb<br>
Logic Design Language<br>
logic emulator<br>
Logic for Computable Functions<br>
logic gate<br>
logic programming<br>
Logic Replacement Technology<br>
logic variable<br>
LOGIN<br>
login<br>
LOGISCOPE<br>
Loglan<br>
Loglan'82<br>
Loglan-88<br>
LOGLISP<br>
LOGO<br>
LOGOL<br>
logon<br>
Lojban<br>
LOL<br>
LOLITA<br>
Lolli<br>
LOM<br>
longitudinal parity<br>
Longitudinal Redundancy Check<br>
LOOK<br>
look and feel<br>
Looking Glass<br>
LOOKS<br>
loop<br>
loop combination<br>
loop fusion<br>
LOOPN<br>
LOOPS<br>
loop through<br>
loose bytes<br>
LOP<br>
lord high fixer<br>
Lore<br>
Lorem ipsum<br>
Lorenz attractor<br>
lose<br>
loser<br>
losing<br>
loss<br>
lossage<br>
lossless<br>
lossy<br>
lost in the noise<br>
lost in the underflow<br>
LOTIS<br>
LOTOS<br>
lots of MIPS but no I/O<br>
Lotus 1-2-3<br>
Lotus Development Corporation DONE (Lotus Software)<br>
Lotus Notes<br>
Lout<br>
love<br>
low-bandwidth<br>
low earth orbit<br>
Lower Layer Protocol<br>
lower set<br>
Low Insertion Force<br>
LOWL<br>
low-level language<br>
low pass filter<br>
Low Voltage Differential<br>
LPAC<br>
LPC<br>
LPF<br>
LPG<br>
LPI<br>
LPL<br>
lpm<br>
LP MUD<br>
lpr<br>
LPS<br>
lp spooler<br>
LPT<br>
lr<br>
LRC<br>
LRLTRAN<br>
LRU<br>
ls<br>
LSA<br>
LSB<br>
LSE<br>
LSL<br>
LSML<br>
L-Soft<br>
LSP<br>
LSR<br>
LSSD<br>
LSYD<br>
lt<br>
LT-2<br>
LTL<br>
LTR<br>
LTR3<br>
lu<br>
LU6.2<br>
lub<br>
Lubarsky's Law of Cybernetic Entomology<br>
Lucent Technologies<br>
LUCID<br>
Lucid Emacs<br>
Lucinda<br>
Lucy<br>
LUG<br>
luminance<br>
lump uncurrying<br>
LUN<br>
lunatic fringe<br>
Lund Simula<br>
Lund Software House AB<br>
lurk<br>
lurker<br>
lurking<br>
luser<br>
Luser Attitude Re-adjustment Tool<br>
LUSTRE<br>
lv<br>
lvalue<br>
LVD<br>
LWP<br>
ly<br>
LYaPAS<br>
Lycos<br>
lynix<br>
LYNX<br>
Lynx<br>
LynxOS<br>
Lynx Real-Time Systems<br>
LYRIC<br>
LZ77 compression<br>
LZ78 compression<br>
LZ compression<br>
lzexe<br>
LZH compression<br>
LZW compression<br>
M<br>
m2<br>
M2toM3<br>
M3<br>
m4<br>
M5<br>
ma<br>
MAC<br>
Mac<br>
Mac-1<br>
MAC-360<br>
MAC address<br>
MACAnalyst<br>
Macaulay<br>
MacBinary<br>
MACDesigner<br>
macdink<br>
MACE<br>
Mach DONE as Mach kernel<br>
Machiavelli<br>
machinable<br>
machine<br>
machine code<br>
machine cycle<br>
machine language<br>
machine learning<br>
Mach Interface Generator<br>
machoflops<br>
Mac II<br>
Mac IIcx<br>
Macintosh<br>
Macintosh Common Lisp<br>
Macintosh file system<br>
Macintosh II<br>
Macintosh IIcx<br>
Macintosh Operating System<br>
Macintosh user interface<br>
Macintoy<br>
Macintrash<br>
MACL<br>
MacLisp<br>
MacMinix<br>
Mac OS<br>
Mac Playmate<br>
MacPPP<br>
MACRO<br>
macro<br>
macro-<br>
macrology<br>
Macromedia<br>
Macro SAP<br>
macrotape<br>
MACSYMA<br>
MacTCP<br>
MacX<br>
MAD<br>
Mad/1<br>
Madaline<br>
MADCAP<br>
MADTRAN<br>
maggotbox<br>
MAGIC<br>
magic<br>
magic bullet<br>
magic cookie<br>
magic number<br>
Magic Paper<br>
magic smoke<br>
Magic Switch Story<br>
Magma<br>
Magma2<br>
MagmaLISP<br>
magnetic disk<br>
Magnetic Ink Character Recognition<br>
magnetic tape<br>
magnetic tape drive<br>
magneto-optical disk<br>
MAGNUM<br>
Magritte<br>
mail<br>
Mail Application Programming Interface<br>
mail bomb<br>
mailbox<br>
mail bridge<br>
Mail Exchange Record<br>
mail exploder<br>
mail filter<br>
mail gateway<br>
mail hub<br>
mailing list<br>
mail merge<br>
mail path<br>
.mailrc<br>
mail server<br>
mail user agent<br>
Mail Users' Shell<br>
MAINBOL<br>
Main Distribution Frame<br>
mainframe<br>
main loop<br>
main memory<br>
MAINSAIL<br>
maintainer<br>
maintainer script<br>
maintenance<br>
Maisie<br>
major delivery<br>
Majordomo<br>
major release<br>
Make<br>
Makedoc<br>
makefile<br>
Maker Interchange Format<br>
MAL<br>
Malamud<br>
MALI<br>
mall<br>
malloc<br>
MAN<br>
man<br>
management<br>
Management Information Base<br>
Management Information System<br>
Manchester Autocode<br>
Manchester encoding<br>
Mandala<br>
Mandelbrot, Benoit<br>
Mandelbrot set<br>
mandelbug<br>
manged<br>
mangle<br>
mangler<br>
mango<br>
man page<br>
mantissa<br>
manual testing<br>
Manufacturer Resource Planning<br>
Manufacturers Automation Protocol<br>
Manufacturing Automation Protocol<br>
manularity<br>
MAO<br>
MAP<br>
map<br>
MAPI<br>
Maple computer algebra system<br>
mapping<br>
marbles<br>
Marc Andreessen<br>
marginal<br>
Marginal Hacks<br>
Maril<br>
Mark 1<br>
marketroid<br>
Markov<br>
Markov chain<br>
Markov model<br>
Markov process<br>
Markowitz<br>
mark-sweep garbage collection<br>
markup<br>
Marlais<br>
Mars<br>
Marseille Prolog<br>
marshaling<br>
marshalling<br>
MARSYAS<br>
Martian<br>
Martin Marietta Laboratories Moorestown<br>
MARVIN<br>
Mary Programming Language<br>
MAS<br>
MASCOT<br>
Mask Read-Only Memory<br>
MASM<br>
MasPar Unity<br>
masquerading<br>
Massachusetts Institute of Technology<br>
massage<br>
Massey Hope<br>
master<br>
Matchmaker<br>
Material Resource Planning<br>
Mathcad<br>
Mathematica<br>
Mathematical Analysis without Programming<br>
Mathematics in Recognizable Form Automatically Compiled<br>
MATH-MATIC or MATHMATIC<br>
math-out<br>
MathWorks<br>
MATLAB<br>
Matrix<br>
Matrix Compiler<br>
MATRIX MATH<br>
Matrix Math eXtensions<br>
MAU<br>
mawk<br>
maximal free expression<br>
maximin<br>
MAXIMOP<br>
maximum Maytag mode<br>
maximum seek time<br>
maximum segment size<br>
Maximum Transmission Unit<br>
Maxis Software<br>
MB<br>
MBASIC<br>
Mbogo, Dr. Fred<br>
MBONE<br>
mbps<br>
MBS<br>
MC<br>
mc<br>
MC68000<br>
MC6809<br>
MCA -- DONE (redirected to Micro Channel Architecture)<br>
MCC<br>
McCulloch-Pitts neuron<br>
McG360<br>
MCI<br>
MCL<br>
M-Code<br>
MCP<br>
MCP-1600<br>
MCS<br>
MCSD<br>
MCSE<br>
mcvax<br>
mcvert<br>
MD<br>
md<br>
MD5<br>
MDF<br>
MDI<br>
MDL<br>
Mean Time Between Failures<br>
Mean Time Between Faults<br>
Mean Time To Recovery<br>
measure<br>
measurement<br>
meatspace<br>
meatware<br>
Media Access Control<br>
Media Access Unit<br>
Media Converter<br>
Media Gateway Control Protocol<br>
Medium Access Control<br>
meeces<br>
Meet<br>
meg<br>
mega-<br>
megabits per second<br>
megabyte<br>
megaflop<br>
megaflops<br>
megahertz<br>
megapenny<br>
MEGO<br>
Mei<br>
Mel<br>
MELD<br>
MELDC<br>
Melinda<br>
Mellor<br>
meltdown<br>
member function<br>
membership function<br>
meme<br>
meme plague<br>
memetic algorithm<br>
memetics<br>
Memex<br>
memo function<br>
memoisation<br>
memoised function<br>
memoization<br>
memoized function<br>
memory<br>
memory address space<br>
memory farts<br>
memory leak<br>
memory location<br>
memory management<br>
Memory Management Unit<br>
memory mapped I/O DONE<br>
memory protection<br>
memory smash<br>
Memory Type Range Registers<br>
MEMS<br>
Mentat<br>
MENTOR<br>
menu<br>
menu bar<br>
menuitis<br>
MENYMA/S<br>
Mercury Autocode<br>
mercury delay line<br>
MERISE<br>
Merlin<br>
MEROON<br>
Mesa<br>
mesh<br>
MESI protocol<br>
message<br>
Message Digest 5<br>
message digest function<br>
Message Handling System<br>
message passing<br>
Message Passing Interface<br>
message switching<br>
Message Transfer Agent<br>
Messaging Application Programming Interface<br>
Messaging Applications Programming Interface<br>
mess-dos<br>
META<br>
meta<br>
META 5<br>
meta bit<br>
MetaCard<br>
Meta-CASE tool<br>
Metaclass<br>
Meta-Crystal<br>
Metadata<br>
meta-data<br>
Metadata Information Partners<br>
META element<br>
metafile<br>
METAFONT<br>
metaheuristic<br>
Meta-II<br>
metainformation<br>
Meta-IV<br>
METAL<br>
metalanguage<br>
Metal Oxide Semiconductor<br>
Metal Oxide Semiconductor Field Effect Transistor<br>
metaphone<br>
metaprogram<br>
metasyntactic variable<br>
metasyntax<br>
META tag<br>
Meta-Vlisp<br>
Met-English<br>
METEOR<br>
meter<br>
method<br>
methodology<br>
Methods<br>
me too<br>
metre<br>
metric<br>
Metropolitan Area Network<br>
M-expression LISP<br>
MFC<br>
MFE<br>
MFLOPS<br>
MFM DONE<br>
MFTL<br>
mg<br>
MGCP<br>
mh<br>
MHDL<br>
MHEG<br>
MHS<br>
MHz<br>
MIB<br>
MIB Variable<br>
Mic-1<br>
Mic-2<br>
MICE<br>
mice<br>
Michigan Algorithm Decoder<br>
mickey<br>
mickey mouse program<br>
MICR<br>
micro<br>
micro-<br>
Micro Assembly Language<br>
microcentury<br>
Micro Channel Architecture -- DONE<br>
microcode<br>
Microcom Networking Protocol<br>
microcomputer<br>
microcontroller<br>
MicroDroid<br>
microelectromechanical system<br>
Microelectronics and Computer Technology Corporation<br>
MicroEmacs<br>
microfloppies<br>
microfortnight<br>
MicroGnuEmacs<br>
Micro Instrumentation and Telemetry Systems<br>
Micro Interpreter for Knowledge Engineering<br>
microkernel<br>
microLenat<br>
micrometre<br>
Micro ML<br>
Micron<br>
micron<br>
Micron Electronics, Inc.<br>
Micronetics Standard MUMPS<br>
Micro$oft<br>
microPLANNER<br>
microprocesor<br>
microprocessor<br>
Microprocessor without Interlocked Pipeline Stages<br>
microprogramming<br>
microReid<br>
MICRO SAINT<br>
microsecond<br>
Microserf<br>
Microslop<br>
Microsloth Windows<br>
Microsoft<br>
Microsoft Access<br>
Microsoft Basic<br>
Microsoft Certified Solution Developer<br>
Microsoft Certified System Engineer<br>
Microsoft Certified Systems Developer<br>
Microsoft Corporation<br>
Microsoft Excel<br>
Microsoft Exchange<br>
Microsoft Extended<br>
Microsoft Foundation Classes<br>
Microsoft IIS<br>
Microsoft IntelliMouse Explorer<br>
Microsoft Internet Information Server<br>
Microsoft Mail<br>
Microsoft Mail Application Program Interface<br>
Microsoft Network<br>
Microsoft Networking<br>
Microsoft Office<br>
Microsoft Point to Point Encryption<br>
Microsoft SQL Server<br>
Microsoft Windows<br>
Microsoft Word<br>
MicroStation<br>
microtape<br>
Microware Corporation<br>
Microwave Hardware Description Language<br>
MIDAS<br>
Midas<br>
Midas-WWW<br>
middle-endian<br>
middleware<br>
MIDI<br>
mid-level network<br>
MIF<br>
MIG<br>
MIGRAINES<br>
MII<br>
MIIS<br>
MIKE<br>
mil<br>
Milarepa<br>
MILITRAN<br>
mill<br>
millennium bug<br>
millennium meltdown<br>
milli-<br>
milliLampson<br>
millisecond<br>
MILNET<br>
MIMD<br>
MIME<br>
mimencode<br>
MIMER<br>
MIME type<br>
MIMIC<br>
MIMOLA<br>
mind mouse<br>
mind uploading<br>
Minerva software<br>
minicomputer<br>
Mini Disc<br>
minifloppy<br>
minimal automaton<br>
minimax<br> DONE
Mini-ML<br>
minimum seek time<br>
Mini PL/I<br>
MINITAB II<br>
MINIX<br>
Minnesota Internet Users Essential Tool<br>
MINT<br>
MiNT<br>
Mint Is Not TRAC<br>
Minuet<br>
MINUIT<br>
minus<br>
minus infinity<br>
MIPS<br>
MIPS project<br>
MIPS R2000<br>
MIPS R2010<br>
MIPS R3000<br>
MIPS R4000<br>
MIPS Technologies, Inc.<br>
Miracula<br>
Miranda<br>
MIRFAC<br>
mirror<br>
mirroring<br>
MIS<br>
misbug<br>
misfeature<br>
MISHAP<br>
Missed'em-five<br>
missile address<br>
miswart<br>
MIT<br>
MIT AI Lab<br>
MITI<br>
MITILAC<br>
MIT Lisp Machine<br>
MITRE Corporation<br>
MIT Research Laboratory for Electronics<br>
MITS<br>
MIT Scheme<br>
MIX<br>
MIXAL<br>
MIX Communications<br>
M-JPEG<br>
MJS<br>
mk<br>
ML<br>
ml<br>
ML-2000<br>
MLAB<br>
ML/I<br>
MLISP<br>
ML Kit<br>
MLL<br>
ML-lex<br>
ML-Linda<br>
ML Threads<br>
ML-Twig<br>
mm<br>
Mma<br>
mmap<br>
MMCD<br>
MMDF<br>
MMI<br>
MML<br>
MMU<br>
MMX<br>
MMX technology<br>
mn<br>
mnemonic<br>
MNP<br>
mo<br>
Mobile Triton<br>
mobo<br>
MOBSSL-UAF<br>
moby<br>
mockingbird<br>
Mockingboard<br>
Mock Lisp<br>
mod<br>
modal<br>
modal logic<br>
MODCAL<br>
Mode<br>
mode<br>
mode bit<br>
MODEF<br>
MODEL<br>
model<br>
model checking<br>
modeling<br>
modelling<br>
Model View Controller<br>
modem<br>
MODEM7<br>
moderator<br>
Modified Frequency Modulation DONE<br>
modifier<br>
M O drive<br>
MODSIM<br>
MODSIM II<br>
Modula<br>
Modula-2<br>
Modula-2*<br>
Modula-2+<br>
Modula-3<br>
Modula-3*<br>
Modula-3pi<br>
Modula-P<br>
Modula-Prolog<br>
Modula/R<br>
Modular C<br>
MODUlar LAnguage<br>
Modular Prolog<br>
Modular SB-Prolog<br>
module<br>
Modulex<br>
modulo<br>
modulo arithmetic<br>
modulo operator<br>
molly-guard<br>
monad<br>
monadic<br>
Mongolian Hordes technique<br>
moniter<br>
monitor<br>
monkey, scratch<br>
monkey up<br>
monochrome<br>
monoid<br>
monotonic<br>
MONSTR<br>
Montage<br>
Monte Carlo<br>
monty<br>
MOO<br>
Moof<br>
Moore bound<br>
Moore graph<br>
Moore's Law<br>
moose call<br>
MooZ<br>
Mops<br>
MORAL<br>
moria<br>
morphing<br>
Morse code<br>
MORTRAN<br>
MOS DONE (MOS Technology)<br>
Mosaic<br>
Mosaic Communications Corporation<br>
Moscow ML<br>
MOSFET<br>
Mosiac<br>
MOS Technologies<br>
most general unifier<br>
most significant bit<br>
motd<br>
mother<br>
motherboard<br>
Motif DONE<br>
Motion JPEG<br>
Motion Picture Experts Group<br>
Motorola<br>
Motorola 14500B<br>
Motorola 6800<br>
Motorola 68000<br>
Motorola 6801<br>
Motorola 68010<br>
Motorola 68020<br>
Motorola 68030<br>
Motorola 68040<br>
Motorola 68050<br>
Motorola 68060<br>
Motorola 6809<br>
Motorola 680x0<br>
Motorola 68HC11<br>
Motorola 68LC040<br>
Motorola 88000<br>
Motorola, Inc.<br>
mount<br>
Mouse<br>
mouse<br>
mouse ahead<br>
mouse around<br>
mouse arrest<br>
mouse belt<br>
mouse droppings<br>
mouse elbow<br>
mouse mat<br>
mouse pad<br>
mouse trails<br>
mouso<br>
Moving JPEG<br>
Moving Picture Expert Group<br>
Moving Picture Experts Group<br>
Moving Pictures Experts Group<br>
Moxie<br>
Mozilla<br>
Mozilla Public License<br>
mp<br>
MP1<br>
MP-1<br>
MP2<br>
MP3<br>
MPC<br>
MPC Level 1 Specification<br>
MPC Level 2 Specification<br>
MPEG<br>
MPEG-1<br>
MPEG-1 audio layer 3<br>
MPEG-1 layer 3<br>
MPEG-2<br>
MPEG-3<br>
MPEG-4<br>
MPG<br>
mpg<br>
MPI<br>
MPL<br>
MPL II<br>
MPLS<br>
MPLS domain<br>
MP/M<br>
MPP<br>
MPPE<br>
MPPL<br>
MPR II<br>
M-Prolog<br>
MPS III<br>
MPSX<br>
MPV<br>
MPX<br>
mq<br>
MQG<br>
mr<br>
MRDS<br>
MRI<br>
MROC<br>
MROM<br>
MRP<br>
MRP II<br>
MRS<br>
ms<br>
MS Access<br>
MSAU<br>
MSB<br>
MS-BASIC<br>
MS-DOG<br>
MS-DOS<br>
MSG.84<br>
msgGUI<br>
MSIE<br>
MSM<br>
MS Mail<br>
MSN<br>
MSS<br>
MS-Windows<br>
MswLogo<br>
MS Word<br>
MSX<br>
MSX-DOS<br>
mt<br>
MTA<br>
MTBF<br>
mtc<br>
M Technology Association<br>
MTOS<br>
MTS<br>
MTTR<br>
MTU<br>
Mu<br>
mu<br>
MUA<br>
MUCAL<br>
MUD<br>
muddie<br>
Muddle<br>
mudhead<br>
MUD Object Oriented<br>
muFP<br>
mu-law<br>
Mule<br>
Mul-T<br>
Multi-BinProlog<br>
multiC<br>
MultiCal System<br>
multicast addressing<br>
multicast backbone<br>
Multi-channel Memorandum Distribution Facility<br>
multician<br>
Multics<br>
Multics Relational Data Store<br>
Multiflow Computer<br>
Multi-Garnet<br>
multihomed host<br>
multilayer perceptron<br>
MultiLisp Done<br>
multimedia<br>
Multimedia and Hypermedia information coding Expert Group<br>
MultiMedia Compact Disc<br>
MultiMedia Extension<br>
Multimedia Integrated Conferencing for European Researchers<br>
Multimedia Internet Mail Extensions<br>
Multimedia Personal Computer<br>
multi-part key<br>
Multi-Pascal<br>
multiple access<br>
Multiple Document Interface<br>
multiple inheritance<br>
Multiple Instruction Multiple Data<br>
Multiple Instruction/Multiple Data<br>
Multiple Master<br>
multiple perspective software development<br>
multiple value<br>
Multiple Virtual Storage<br>
multiplexer<br>
multiplexing<br>
multiplexor<br>
Multiplexor Channel<br>
multiplex printer<br>
Multipop-68<br>
multiprocessing<br>
multiprocessor<br>
multiprogramming<br>
Multiprotocol Label Switching<br>
Multipurpose Internet Mail Extensions<br>
multiscan<br>
MultiScheme<br>
Multistation Access Unit<br>
multisync<br>
Multisystem eXtension Interface Bus<br>
multitasking<br>
Multi-tasking Program for Microcomputers<br>
multithreaded<br>
multithreading<br>
MultiTOS<br>
Multi-User Dimension<br>
Multi-User Dungeon<br>
Multi-User Shared Hallucination<br>
Multi-Version Concurrency Control<br>
multi-way branch<br>
MuMath<br>
mumblage<br>
mumble<br>
mumble mode<br>
MUMPS<br>
munch<br>
munching<br>
munching squares<br>
munchkin<br>
mundane<br>
mung<br>
munge<br>
MUP<br>
MU-Prolog<br>
Murphy's Law<br>
Muse<br>
museum<br>
MUSH<br>
Music<br>
Musical Instrument Digital Interface<br>
MuSimp<br>
MUSL<br>
mutant<br>
Mutation Testing<br>
MuTeX<br>
mutex<br>
mutter<br>
mutual exclusion<br>
mutually recursive<br>
mutual recursion<br>
mux<br>
mv<br>
MVC<br>
MVCC<br>
MVS<br>
MVS/ESA<br>
MVS/OE<br>
MVS/Open Edition<br>
MVS/SP<br>
MVS/XA<br>
mw<br>
MX<br>
mx<br>
MXI<br>
MXIbus<br>
MX Record<br>
my<br>
My Favourite Toy Language<br>
MYOB<br>
MYSTIC<br>
mz<br>
N<br>
N10<br>
na<br>
nadger<br>
NAG<br>
Nagling Coalescence<br>
nagware<br>
nailed to the wall<br>
nailing jelly<br>
naive<br>
naive user<br>
NAK<br>
name capture<br>
named<br>
named pipe<br>
name resolution<br>
name service switching<br>
namespace<br>
NaN<br>
NAND<br>
nano-<br>
nanoacre<br>
nanobot<br>
nanocomputer<br>
nanofortnight<br>
nanosecond<br>
nanotechnology<br>
Napier<br>
NAPLPS DONE<br>
NAPSS<br>
narrowing<br>
NAS<br>
nasal demons<br>
NASI<br>
nastistical<br>
NASTRAN<br>
nastygram<br>
NAT<br>
Nathan Hale<br>
National Bureau of Standards<br>
National Center for Supercomputing Applications<br>
national characters<br>
National Database Language<br>
National Information Infrastructure<br>
National Information Services and Systems<br>
National Institute of Standards and Technology<br>
National Research and Education Network<br>
National Science Foundation<br>
National Science Foundation Network<br>
National Software Reuse Directory<br>
National Spatial Data Infrastructure<br>
National Television Standards Committee<br>
native compiler<br>
Native Language System<br>
NATURAL<br>
natural deduction<br>
Natural English<br>
natural language<br>
Natural Language Information Analysis Method<br>
natural language processing<br>
natural number<br>
nature<br>
NAU<br>
navigating<br>
Navigator<br>
Nawk<br>
NB<br>
NBFCP<br>
NBS<br>
NBT<br>
NC<br>
nc<br>
NCD<br>
NCP<br>
NCR Corporation<br>
NCS<br>
NCSA<br>
ND<br>
NDIS<br>
NDL<br>
NDS<br>
ne<br>
neat hack<br>
neats vs. scruffies<br>
Nebula<br>
NEC<br>
neep-neep<br>
negation by failure<br>
negative acknowledge<br>
NELIAC<br>
Neon<br>
neophilia<br>
Neptune<br>
Nerd pride<br>
NERECO<br>
NESL<br>
net<br>
net.-<br>
netaddress<br>
NetBEUI<br>
NetBIOS<br>
NetBIOS Frames Control Protocol<br>
NetBios over TCP/IP<br>
NetBOLLIX<br>
netbui<br>
netburp<br>
netCDF DONE
Netcom On-line Communication Services, Inc.<br>
netdead<br>
Netfind<br>
net.god<br>
NetHack<br>
netiquette -- DONE<br>
NETL<br>
netlag<br>
netload<br>
Netmarq Limited<br>
netmask<br>
NetNanny<br>
netnews<br>
net.personality<br>
netpipes<br>
net.police<br>
netquette<br>
Netrek<br>
netrock<br>
Netscape<br>
Netscape Communications Corporation<br>
Netscape Navigator<br>
Netscape Public License<br>
netsplit<br>
netstat<br>
netter<br>
NetWare<br>
NetWare Core Protocol<br>
Netware Directory Services<br>
Netware Input/Output Subsystem<br>
NetWare Link State Protocol<br>
network<br>
network address<br>
Network Addressable Unit<br>
Network Address Translation<br>
Network Address Translator<br>
network byte order<br>
network card<br>
network closet<br>
Network Computing Devices<br>
network database<br>
Network Definition Language<br>
Network Device Interface Specification<br>
Network extensible Window System<br>
Network File System<br>
Network Filing System<br>
Network Information Center<br>
Network Information Service DONE<br>
Network Information System DONE<br>
networking<br>
network interface card<br>
network interface controller<br>
network layer<br>
network management<br>
network meltdown<br>
Network News Transfer Protocol<br>
Network Node Interface<br>
network number<br>
network operating system<br>
Network Operations Center<br>
network redirector<br>
network segment<br>
Network Solutions, Inc.<br>
Network Termination<br>
network, the<br>
Network Time Protocol<br>
network transparency<br>
NetX<br>
Net:X<br>
neural nets<br>
neural network<br>
neuron<br>
Neutral Interconnect<br>
neutrosophic<br>
neutrosophic logic<br>
neutrosophic probability<br>
neutrosophic set<br>
neutrosophic statistics<br>
Neutrosophy<br>
Never Offline<br>
newbie<br>
New Flavors<br>
newgroup wars<br>
New Jersey<br>
newline<br>
NEWP<br>
NEW Programming language<br>
NeWS DONE<br>
news<br>
NewsClip<br>
newsfroup<br>
newsgroup<br>
newsletter<br>
Newspeak<br>
Newsqueak<br>
.newsrc<br>
news reader<br>
New Storage System<br>
new talk<br>
New Testament<br>
Newton DONE, renamed Apple Newton<br>
Newton-Raphson<br>
NewWave<br>
NewYacc<br>
New York State Educational Reasearch ETwork<br>
New York University<br>
NEXOR<br>
Nexpert Object<br>
NeXT, Inc.<br>
Next Program Counter<br>
NEXTSTEP<br>
nf<br>
NFA<br>
NFQL<br>
NFS<br>
NFT<br>
ng<br>
NGL<br>
NHOH<br>
ni<br>
NIAL<br>
NIAL Systems Ltd.<br>
NIAM<br>
nibble<br>
Nibble Mode DRAM<br>
NIC<br>
NIC.DDN.MIL<br>
NICE<br>
nick<br>
nickle<br>
NICOL I<br>
NIFOC = Nude In Front Of The Computer <br>
Nightmare File System<br>
night mode<br>
NIH<br>
NIHCL<br>
NII<br>
NIKL<br>
Niklaus Wirth<br>
NIL<br>
niladic<br>
Ninety-Ninety Rule<br>
NIOS<br>
nipple<br>
NIS<br>
NISO<br>
NISS<br>
NIST<br>
NJCL<br>
nl<br>
NLM<br>
NLP<br>
NLS<br>
NLSP<br>
NLX<br>
NMI<br>
nML<br>
NMU<br>
NN<br>
nn<br>
NNI<br>
NNTP<br>
no<br>
NOC<br>
NODAL<br>
Nodal Switching System<br>
noddy<br>
node<br>
NOL<br>
NOMAD<br>
NOMEX underwear<br>
Nominal Semidestructor<br>
non-algorithmic procedure<br>
nondeterminism<br>
nondeterministic<br>
nondeterministic automaton<br>
nondeterministic polynomial time<br>
Nondeterministic Turing Machine<br>
non-impact printer<br>
non-interlaced<br>
nonintrusive testing<br>
nonlinear<br>
Non-Maintainer Upload<br>
Non-Maskable Interrupt<br>
non-optimal solution<br>
Nonpareil<br>
non parity<br>
non-polynomial<br>
Non Return to Zero Inverted<br>
nontrivial<br>
Non-Uniform Memory Access<br>
non-uniform quantising logarithmic compression<br>
Non-Uniform Rational B Spline<br>
non-volatile<br>
non-volatile memory<br>
Non-Volatile Random Access Memory<br>
non-volatile storage<br>
no-op<br>
NOR<br>
NORC COMPILER<br>
NorCroft<br>
NORD PL<br>
NORDUnet<br>
norm<br>
normal distribution<br>
normal form<br>
normalisation<br>
normalised<br>
normal order reduction<br>
normed space<br>
northbridge<br>
NorthWestNet<br>
NOS<br>
NOT<br>
Not-a-Number<br>
notebook<br>
NoteCards<br>
Notepad<br>
Notes<br>
Nother<br>
not ready for prime time<br>
notwork<br>
Nova - is this Data General Nova?<br>
Novell Data Systems<br>
Novell DOS<br>
Novell, Inc.<br>
Novell NetWare<br>
NOWEB<br>
no-write allocation DONE<br>
NP<br>
np<br>
NPC<br>
NP-complete<br>
NP-hard<br>
NPL<br>
NPPL<br>
N-Prolog<br>
NP time<br>
NQS<br>
Nqthm<br>
nr<br>
NREN<br>
nroff<br>
NRZ<br>
NRZI<br>
ns<br>
NSA line eater<br>
NSAPI<br>
NSDI<br>
NSE<br>
NSF<br>
NSFIP<br>
NSFNET<br>
NSI<br>
nslookup<br>
NSRD<br>
NSS<br>
NT<br>
NT1<br>
NT5<br>
ntalk<br>
NTAS<br>
NT File System<br>
NTFS<br>
n-tier<br>
NTIS<br>
NTMBS<br>
NTP<br>
NTSC<br>
NTU<br>
nu<br>
NuBus<br>
nu-calculus<br>
NUCLEOL<br>
nude<br>
nuke<br>
null<br>
nullary<br>
null modem<br>
null-terminated multibyte string<br>
NUMA<br>
number crunching<br>
numbers<br>
number sign<br>
Numeris<br>
Nuprl<br>
NU-Prolog<br>
nurbs -- DONE<br>
Nu Thena<br>
NUXI problem<br>
NVRAM<br>
NVS<br>
NWNET<br>
NYAP<br>
nybble<br>
nyetwork<br>
nym<br>
nym server<br>
Nyquist frequency -- DONE <br> 
Nyquist Theorem-- DONE<br>
NYSERNET<br>
NYU OMNIFAX<br>
nz<br>

</doc>
<doc id="11332" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11332" title="Wikipedia:Free On-line Dictionary of Computing/O - Q">
Wikipedia:Free On-line Dictionary of Computing/O - Q

O<br>
O2<br>
Oaklisp<br>
OAP<br>
OATH<br>
Ob-<br>
OBDC<br>
OBE<br>
Oberon DONE<br>
Oberon-2<br>
Oberon-V<br>
Obfuscated C Contest DONE<br>
obi-wan error<br>
OBJ<br>
OBJ0<br>
OBJ2<br>
OBJ3<br>
object<br>
ObjectBroker<br>
ObjectCenter<br>
Object CHILL<br>
object code<br>
Object Compatibility Standard<br>
Object Database Management Group DONE<br>
Object Data Management Group (see above)<br>
Objecteering<br>
object identifier<br>
Objectionable-C<br>
Objective-C DONE<br>
Objective CAML<br>
Objective Pascal<br>
Object Linking and Embedding<br>
Object Lisp<br>
ObjectLOGO<br>
Object Management Group<br>
Object management system<br>
Object Modelling Technique<br>
Object Oberon<br>
object-orientation<br>
object-oriented<br>
object-oriented analysis<br>
object-oriented database DONE<br>
object-oriented design<br>
Object-Oriented Fortran<br>
object-oriented language<br>
Object-Oriented Pascal<br>
object-oriented programming<br>
object-oriented programming language<br>
Object-oriented SQL<br>
Object-Oriented Turing<br>
ObjectPAL<br>
Object Pascal<br>
Object Request Broker<br>
Object Role Modeling<br>
Object Value<br>
Objectworks<br>
Object Z<br>
Objlog<br>
OBJT<br>
ObjVlisp<br>
ObjVProlog<br>
Obliq<br>
oblique stroke<br>
Oblog<br>
OBSCURE<br>
observational equivalence<br>
Oc<br>
OC-12<br>
OC-3<br>
OC-48<br>
OCAL<br>
occam<br>
occam 2<br>
Occam's Razor<br>
occlude<br>
occurs check<br>
OCL<br>
OCLC<br>
OC-n<br>
OCODE<br>
OCP<br>
OCR<br>
OCS<br>
octal<br>
octal forty<br>
Octave<br>
octet<br>
octothorpe<br>
OCX<br>
OD390<br>
ODA<br>
ODBC<br>
ODC<br>
Ode<br>
ODI<br>
ODIF<br>
ODMA<br>
ODMG<br>
ODP<br>
ODSA<br>
ODT<br>
OEM<br>
off-by-one error<br>
Office<br>
Office By Example<br>
Office Workstations Limited<br>
off-line<br>
off-line world<br>
off-side rule<br>
off the trolley<br>
ogg (done)<br>
OHCI<br>
Ohm<br>
ohnosecond<br>
OIC<br>
OID<br>
-oid<br>
OIL<br>
OLAP<br>
OLC<br>
OLDAS<br>
old fart<br>
old talk<br>
Old Testament<br>
OLE<br>
OLE custom controls<br>
OLGA<br>
Olivetti<br>
O-Logic<br>
OLTP<br>
OLWM<br>
om<br>
OMA<br>
Omega<br>
Omega-algebraic<br>
Omega test<br>
OMF<br>
OMG<br>
OMNICODE<br>
OMNIFAX<br>
OMNITAB<br>
OMR<br>
OMS<br>
OMT<br>
OMTool<br>
ONC<br>
Ondine<br>
one-banana problem<br>
one-line fix<br>
one-liner wars<br>
ones complement<br>
One-Time Password<br>
One Time Programmable Read-Only Memory<br>
one-way function<br>
one-way hash function<br>
on-line<br>
On-Line Analytical Processing<br>
Online Computer Library Center, Inc.<br>
On-Line Computer system<br>
Online Media<br>
Online Public Access Catalog<br>
On-Line Transaction Processing<br>
Ontic<br>
onto<br>
ontology<br>
OnX<br>
OO<br>
OOA<br>
OOD<br>
OODB DONE<br>
OODBMS DONE<br>
OOF<br>
OOGL<br>
OOP<br>
OOPL<br>
OOPS<br>
OOPSLA<br>
OOSD<br>
OOZE<br>
op<br>
OPAC<br>
Opal<br>
op code<br>
open<br>
open box testing<br>
OpenBSD NO IMPORT insubstantial<br>
open/closed principle<br>
open-collar worker<br>
Open DataBase Connectivity<br>
Open Data-link Interface<br>
Open DeathTrap<br>
Open Desktop<br>
Open Distributed Processing<br>
Open Distributed System Architecture<br>
OpenDoc<br>
Open Document Architecture<br>
Open Document Interchange Format<br>
Open Document Management API<br>
OpenGL DONE<br>
Open Graphics Library DONE<br>
OpenInsight<br>
Open Look<br>
Open Network Computing<br>
Open Prolog<br>
Open Scripting Architecture<br>
Open Shortest-Path First<br>
Open Shortest-Path First Interior Gateway Protocol<br>
Open Software Foundation<br>
open source NO IMPORT insubstantial<br>
Open Source Definition<br>
Open Source Initiative<br>
Open source license<br>
OpenStep DONE<br>
open switch<br>
Open Systems Interconnect<br>
Open Systems Interconnection<br>
Open Telecom Platform<br>
Open Trading Protocol<br>
OpenTransport<br>
Open University<br>
OpenVMS<br>
OpenWindows<br>
operand<br>
operating system<br>
Operating System/360<br>
Operating System/Multiprogramming of Fixed Tasks<br>
operational database<br>
operational requirements<br>
operational semantics<br>
operational test and evaluation<br>
operational testing<br>
operation code<br>
operator<br>
operator overloading<br>
Opportunity Management System<br>
OPS<br>
OPS5<br>
OPS83<br>
Optical Carrier 12<br>
Optical Carrier 3<br>
Optical Carrier 48<br>
Optical Carrier n<br>
Optical Character Recognition<br>
optical diff<br>
optical fiber<br>
optical fibre<br>
optical grep<br>
Optical Mark Reader<br>
optical mouse NO IMPORT insubstantial<br>
Optical Time Domain Reflectometer<br>
Optical Time Domain Reflectometry<br>
optimal<br>
optimise NO IMPORT insubstantial<br>
optimising compiler NO IMPORT insubstantial<br>
optimism<br>
optimize NO IMPORT insubstantial<br>
option<br>
OPTRAN<br>
Opus<br>
OR<br>
Oracle 7<br>
Oracle Card<br>
Oracle*CASE<br>
Oracle Co-operative Applications<br>
Oracle Corporation<br>
Oracle Rdb DONE<br>
Oracle Toolkit<br>
Orange Book<br>
ORB<br>
Orbit<br>
Orca<br>
Order Code Processor<br>
order-embedding<br>
ordering<br>
ordinal<br>
ordinate<br>
OREGANO<br>
O'Reilly and Associates<br>
org<br>
Organic Mode<br>
Orient84/K<br>
Original Equipment Manufacturer<br>
ORKID<br>
ORM<br>
orphaned i-node<br>
orphan process<br>
ORTHOCARTAN<br>
orthogonal<br>
orthogonal instruction set<br>
Orwell<br>
OS<br>
OS2<br>
OS/2<br>
OS/360 DONE<br>
OS/390 DONE<br>
OS-9<br>
OSA<br>
OSA extension<br>
OSAX<br>
OSCAR<br>
OSD<br>
OSE<br>
OSF<br>
OSI<br>
OSI Model<br>
OSI Reference Model<br>
OSI-RM<br>
OSI seven layer model<br>
O'small<br>
OS/MFT<br>
OS/MVT<br>
OSP<br>
OSPF<br>
OSQL<br>
OSSL<br>
OS/VS1<br>
OS/VS2<br>
OT<br>
OTDR<br>
OT&amp<br>E<br>
OTI<br>
OTOH<br>
OTP<br>
OTPROM<br>
OTT<br>
Ottawa Euclid<br>
Ousterhout, John K.<br>
Ousterhout's dichotomy<br>
Ousterhout's fallacy<br>
Ousterhout's false dichotomy<br>
outer join<br>
outline font<br>
out-of-band DONE<br>
output<br>
output device<br>
Outside Awareness Port<br>
outside-in testing<br>
outsourcing<br>
overclocking<br>
Overdrive<br>
overflow bit<br>
overflow pdl<br>
overhead<br>
overlay<br>
overloading<br>
overriding<br>
overrun<br>
overrun screw<br>
overuse strain injury<br>
OWHY<br>
OWL<br>
Owl<br>
Ox<br>
Oz<br>
oz<br>
Oz-Email<br>
P+<br>
P1754<br>
p2c<br>
P3L<br>
P4<br>
P6<br>
pa<br>
PABX<br>
PACE<br>
Packard Bell Electronics, Inc.<br>
packed decimal Done<br>
Packed Encoding Rules<br>
packet<br>
Packet Assembler/Disassembler<br>
packet driver<br>
Packet in Plastic Grid Array<br>
Packet InterNet Groper<br>
packet radio<br>
packet sniffer<br>
packet-switched<br>
packet switching<br>
Packet Switch Node<br>
packet writing<br>
PackIt<br>
PACT I<br>
PACTOLUS<br>
PAD<br>
padded cell<br>
Paddle<br>
PAGE<br>
page<br>
paged<br>
Page Description Language<br>
Paged Memory Management Unit<br>
page fault<br>
page in<br>
page mode<br>
Page Mode DRAM<br>
Page Mode Dynamic Random Access Memory<br>
page out<br>
pager<br>
paging<br>
PaiLisp<br>
pain in the net<br>
Paintbrush<br>
PAISley<br>
PAL<br>
Palace<br>
palette<br>
palmtop<br>
Palo Alto Research Center<br>
Palo Alto Research Centre<br>
PAM<br>
Pam<br>
Pandora<br>
panic<br>
PANON<br>
PANS<br>
Pansophic<br>
Pantone<br>
PAP (computer)<br>
Paper Feed Control Character<br>
papermail<br>
paper-net<br>
paraconsistent probability<br>
PARADE<br>
PARADIGM PLUS<br>
Paradigms of AI Programming<br>
Paradise<br>
Paradox<br>
paradox<br>
Paradox Application Language<br>
Paragon<br>
Paralation<br>
Paralation C<br>
Paralation LISP<br>
ParAlfl<br>
Parallaxis<br>
Parallel C<br>
parallel computer<br>
parallel computing<br>
Parallel FORTH<br>
Parallel Fortran<br>
Parallel Haskell<br>
parallelism<br>
Parallel Pascal<br>
parallel port DONE<br>
Parallel Presence Detect<br>
parallel processing<br>
parallel processor<br>
parallel random access machine<br>
parallel reduction<br>
Parallel SML<br>
Parallel Sysplex<br>
Parallel Virtual Machine<br>
param<br>
parameter<br>
parameter RAM<br>
parametric polymorphism<br>
paraML<br>
paranoid programming<br>
ParaSoft Corp<br>
Parasol<br>
PARC<br>
parent<br>
parentheses<br>
parent message<br>
parent process DONE<br>
Pari<br>
Paris<br>
parity<br>
parity bit<br>
parity error<br>
Parkinson's Law of Data<br>
Park-Miller<br>
Parlance<br>
Parlog<br>
Parlog++<br>
parm<br>
PARMACS<br>
ParMod<br>
PARS<br>
PARSEC<br>
parser<br>
parser generator<br>
parsing<br>
Parsley<br>
Partial Differential Equation LANguage<br>
partial equivalence relation<br>
partial evaluation<br>
partial function<br>
partial key<br>
partially ordered set<br>
partial ordering<br>
Partial Response Maximum Likelihood<br>
partition<br>
PARTS<br>
@-party<br>
PARULEL<br>
Pascal<br>
Pascal-<br>
Pascal-80<br>
Pascal+CSP<br>
Pascal-F<br>
Pascal-FC<br>
Pascal/L<br>
Pascal-Linda<br>
Pascal-m<br>
Pascal-P<br>
Pascal P4<br>
Pascal Plus<br>
Pascal/R<br>
Pascal-S<br>
Pascal-SC<br>
pasos2<br>
Pasqual<br>
PASRO<br>
PASSIM<br>
passive matrix display<br>
passphrase<br>
password<br>
Password Authentication Protocol<br>
paste<br>
pastie<br>
PAT<br>
patch<br>
patch pumpkin<br>
patch space<br>
PATCHY<br>
path<br>
path coverage testing<br>
pathname<br>
pathname separator<br>
pathological<br>
Path Pascal<br>
pathspec<br>
pattern matching<br>
pattern recognition<br>
PAW<br>
PAW++<br>
payware<br>
PB Cache<br>
PBD<br>
PBEM<br>
PBM<br>
PBX<br>
PC<br>
pC++<br>
PC200<br>
PCA<br>
P-CAD<br>
PC AT<br>
PCB<br>
PC Card<br>
PCCTS<br>
PCF<br>
PCI NO IMPORT insubstantial<br>
PCI bus NO IMPORT insubstantial<br>
PCI Configuration Utility<br>
PCI Mezzanine Card<br>
PCI slot NO IMPORT insubstantial<br>
PC-ism<br>
PCjr<br>
PCL<br>
PCLIPS<br>
PCM<br>
PCMCIA<br>
PCMIA<br>
PCN<br>
PC-NFS<br>
P-code<br>
PC Pursuit<br>
PC-RT<br>
PCS<br>
PC-Scheme<br>
PCS/Geneva<br>
PC-TALK III<br>
PCTE<br>
PCTE+<br>
PC-TILES<br>
PCU<br>
PC-ware<br>
pcx<br>
PD<br>
PDA<br>
PDC<br>
PDC Prolog<br>
PDEL<br>
PDELAN<br>
PDES<br>
PDF<br>
PDFTeX<br>
PDH<br>
PDIL<br>
pdksh<br>
PDL<br>
PDL2<br>
PDM<br>
PDP<br>
PDP-10<br>
PDP-11<br>
PDP-20<br>
PDP-6<br>
PDP-7<br>
PDP Assembly Language<br>
PDS<br>
PDSA cycle<br>
PDS/MaGen<br>
PDU<br>
PE<br>
pe<br>
PeaceNet<br>
Peano arithmetic<br>
PEARL<br>
Pebble<br>
Pebbleman<br>
PEBCAK<br>
PEBKAC<br>
PECOS<br>
Pedagogic Algorithmic Language<br>
PEEK<br>
PEEL<br>
peephole optimisation<br>
peer<br>
peer-to-peer<br>
Pegasus<br>
PEIPA<br>
PEM<br>
PENCIL<br>
pencil and paper<br>
penis war<br>
Pentium<br>
Pentium 2<br>
Pentium 3<br>
Pentium II<br>
Pentium III<br>
Pentium II Xeon<br>
Pentium Pro<br>
peon<br>
PeopleSoft, Inc.<br>
Pepper<br>
PEPsy<br>
PER<br>
percent<br>
perceptron<br>
percussive maintenance<br>
perf<br>
perfect programmer syndrome<br>
PERFORM<br>
periodic group<br>
peripheral<br>
Peripheral Component Interconnect NO IMPORT insubstantial<br>
peripheral device<br>
Peripheral Technology Group<br>
Perl<br>
Perl5<br>
perl-byacc<br>
Perl profiler<br>
Permanent Virtual Circuit<br>
Permanent Virtual Connection<br>
permission<br>
permutation<br>
perp<br>
perplexity<br>
persistence<br>
persistent<br>
Persistent Functional Language<br>
persistent memory<br>
Personal Communication Network<br>
Personal Communication Services<br>
personal computer<br>
Personal Computer Memory Card International Association<br>
Personal Digital Assistant<br>
Personal Identification Number<br>
Personalized Array Translator<br>
person of no account<br>
perspective<br>
PERT<br>
pessimal<br>
pessimising compiler<br>
peta-<br>
petabyte<br>
petaflops<br>
petdingo<br>
Peter Chen<br>
Petri net<br>
PETSCII DONE, inside the Commodore PET article<br>
PEX<br>
pf<br>
PFE<br>
PFL<br>
pfm<br>
pForth<br>
Pfortran<br>
pg<br>
PGA<br>
PGA370<br>
PGP<br>
PH<br>
pH<br>
ph<br>
phacker<br>
phage<br>
phase<br>
phase alternating line<br>
Phase Encoded<br>
phase of the moon<br>
phase-wrapping<br>
PHIGS<br>
Philips<br>
Philips SCC68070<br>
philosophy<br>
PHOCUS<br>
phone mail<br>
Phonetastic<br>
Phong shading<br>
phosphor fatigue<br>
photo CD<br>
Photoshop<br>
PHP<br>
phreaking DONE<br>
physical address<br>
physical addressing<br>
physical layer<br>
physical memory<br>
physical memory address<br>
Physics Analysis Workbench<br>
PI<br>
PIC<br>
pi-calculus<br>
Pick BASIC<br>
PICL<br>
pico-<br>
picosecond<br>
PICS<br>
PICT<br>
PicTeX<br>
Pictorial Janus<br>
picture<br>
picture element<br>
Picture Quality Scale<br>
PID<br>
pidgen+<br>
PIE<br>
pif<br>
piggybacking<br>
pig, run like a<br>
PIGUI<br>
PIL<br>
PILE<br>
PIL/I<br>
PILOT<br>
pilot error<br>
Pilot European Image Processing Archive<br>
PIM<br>
PIN<br>
PINBOL<br>
pine<br>
pin feed<br>
ping<br>
ping-flood<br>
pinging<br>
ping-pong<br>
Pin Grid Array<br>
Pink-Shirt Book<br>
pin-out<br>
PIP<br>
pipe<br>
pipeline<br>
pipeline break<br>
Pipeline Burst Cache<br>
pipelined<br>
Pipelined Burst Cache<br>
pipeline stall<br>
pipelining<br>
PIPEX Ltd.<br>
piracy<br>
pirate<br>
PIRL<br>
pistol<br>
PIT<br>
pixel<br>
pixmap<br>
pizza box<br>
PJPEG<br>
pk<br>
PKE<br>
PKI<br>
PKLITE<br>
PKUNZIP<br>
PKWARE, Inc.<br>
PKZIP<br>
pl<br>
PL1<br>
PL/1<br>
PL-11<br>
PL360<br>
PL516<br>
PL-6<br>
PL.8<br>
Pla<br>
PLACE<br>
PLAGO<br>
plaid screen<br>
PLAIN<br>
plain ASCII<br>
Plain Old Documentation<br>
Plain Old Telephone Service<br>
Plain Old Telephone System<br>
plain TeX<br>
plaintext<br>
PLAN<br>
.plan<br>
Plan 9<br>
Planet<br>
plan file<br>
PLANIT<br>
Plankalkül<br>
PLANNER<br>
Planner-73<br>
PLANS<br>
plants<br>
PLASMA<br>
Plastic Pin Grid Array<br>
platform<br>
Platform for Internet Content Selection<br>
Platform Independent Graphical User Interface<br>
platinum-iridium<br>
Platon<br>
PLAY<br>
play by electronic mail<br>
Playground<br>
Play, Inc.<br>
playpen<br>
Playstation<br>
playte<br>
PLC<br>
PL/C<br>
PL Cornell<br>
PLD<br>
plenum cable<br>
pleonasm<br>
plesiochronous<br>
Plesiochronous Digital Hierarchy<br>
Pleuk grammar development system<br>
Plexus<br>
PL/I<br>
PL/I-FORMAC<br>
pling<br>
plingnet<br>
PLisp<br>
PL/I SUBSET<br>
PL/I Subset G<br>
PLITS<br>
PLL<br>
PL/M DONE<br>
PLMK<br>
plokta<br>
plonk<br>
plotter<br>
PL/P<br>
PL/PROPHET<br>
PL/S<br>
PL/Seq<br>
PL/SQL<br>
PLTL<br>
plug and play<br>
plug and pray<br>
Pluggable Authentication Module<br>
plugh<br>
plug-in<br>
PLUM<br>
Plumber<br>
plumbing<br>
Plural EuLisp<br>
PLUS<br>
plus<br>
PLUSS<br>
ply<br>
PM<br>
pm<br>
pm2<br>
P-mail<br>
PMBX<br>
PMC<br>
PML<br>
pn<br>
pnambic<br>
PNG<br>
PNP<br>
PNU-Prolog<br>
PoB<br>
POC<br>
POCAL<br>
pocket calculator<br>
pocket computer<br>
pod<br>
P.O.D.<br>
POE<br>
POFAC<br>
POGO<br>
point<br>
point-and-drool interface<br>
point-and-grunt interface<br>
pointed domain<br>
pointer<br>
pointer swizzling<br>
pointing device<br>
Point Of Contact<br>
point of presence<br>
point of sale terminal<br>
Point-to-Point Protocol<br>
Point-to-Point Tunneling Protocol<br>
Poisson distributions<br>
poke<br>
Polka<br>
poll<br>
polling<br>
Poly<br>
polygon pusher<br>
POLYGOTH<br>
polylithism<br>
Poly/ML<br>
polymorphic<br>
polymorphic lambda-calculus<br>
polymorphism<br>
polynomial<br>
polynomial-time<br>
polynomial-time algorithm<br>
polyvinyl chloride<br>
POM<br>
Ponder<br>
Pong<br>
POOL<br>
POOL2<br>
POOL-I<br>
POOL-T<br>
POP<br>
PoP<br>
pop<br>
POP++<br>
POP-1<br>
POP-10<br>
Pop-11<br>
POP-2<br>
POP3<br>
POP-9X<br>
POPART<br>
POPCORN<br>
pop-down menu<br>
POPJ<br>
Poplar<br>
POPLER<br>
POPLOG<br>
POPLOG ML<br>
POP server<br>
PopTalk<br>
porno<br>
pornography<br>
port<br>
portability<br>
portable<br>
Portable AIRTIME<br>
Portable Commodore 64<br>
Portable Common Loops<br>
Portable Common Tool Environment<br>
Portable Document Format<br>
Portable Forth Environment<br>
Portable Network Graphics<br>
Portable Operating System Interface<br>
Portable Pixmap<br>
Portable Scheme Debugger<br>
Portable Scheme Interpreter<br>
Portable Standard Lisp<br>
Portable Tool Interface<br>
Port Address Translation<br>
PORTAL<br>
portal<br>
porting<br>
Port Language<br>
portmapper<br>
port number<br>
POS<br>
POSE<br>
poset<br>
POSIX<br>
POST<br>
post<br>
postcardware<br>
posted write-through DONE<br>
Postel, Jon<br>
postfix notation<br>
postfix syntax<br>
POSTGRES<br>
PostgreSQL<br>
posting<br>
postmaster<br>
post office problem<br>
Post Office Protocol<br>
post-order traversal<br>
POSTQUEL<br>
PostScript DONE<br>
Post, Telephone and Telegraph administration<br>
POSYBL<br>
potential difference<br>
POTS<br>
pound<br>
pound on<br>
pound sign<br>
POWER<br>
PowerBuilder<br>
power cycle DONE<br>
powerdomain<br>
PowerFuL<br>
power hit<br>
PowerMac<br>
Power Macintosh<br>
power-on self-test<br>
PowerOpen<br>
PowerOpen Association<br>
PowerOpen Environment<br>
PowerPC<br>
PowerPC 601<br>
PowerPC G3<br>
PowerPC Platform<br>
PowerPC Reference Platform<br>
Powerpoint<br>
power save mode<br>
powerset<br>
Powersoft Corporation<br>
PP96<br>
PPC<br>
PPCP<br>
PPD<br>
PPGA<br>
PPL<br>
PPLambda<br>
PPM<br>
PPN<br>
PPP<br>
P-Prolog<br>
PPTP<br>
PQS<br>
PR<br>
pr<br>
pr0n<br>
PRA<br>
pragma<br>
PRAM<br>
Praxis Critical Systems<br>
pre ox<br>
PRE-CC<br>
PRECCX<br>
precedence lossage<br>
precharge<br>
precision<br>
predecessor<br>
predicate calculus<br>
predomain<br>
pre-emptive multitasking<br>
prefetch<br>
prefix DONE<br>
prefix notation<br>
prefix syntax<br>
pre-order<br>
pre-order traversal<br>
PREP<br>
prepaging<br>
prepend<br>
preprocessor<br>
presence detect<br>
presentation layer<br>
Presentation Manager<br>
prestidigitization<br>
PRESTO<br>
Pretty Amazing New Stuff<br>
Pretty Good Privacy<br>
pretty pictures<br>
prettyprint<br>
pretzel key<br>
preventive maintenance<br>
PRI<br>
primary cache<br>
primary key<br>
primary management domain<br>
Primary Rate Interface<br>
Prime Computer<br>
Primenet, Inc.<br>
prime number theorem<br>
prime time<br>
primitive<br>
Princeton University<br>
principal type<br>
PRINT<br>
printed circuit board<br>
printer<br>
Printer Access Protocol<br>
printer port<br>
printf<br>
PRINT I<br>
printing discussion<br>
print server<br>
Print Services Facility<br>
priority interrupt<br>
priority inversion<br>
priority queue<br>
priority scheduling<br>
PRISM<br>
Prisoner of Bill<br>
privacy<br>
Privacy Enhanced Mail<br>
Private Automatic Branch eXchange<br>
Private Branch Exchange<br>
Private Manual Branch eXchange<br>
privileged instruction<br>
PRL<br>
PRMD<br>
PRML DONE<br>
probabilistic<br>
probabilistic automaton<br>
Probe<br>
problem state<br>
PROC<br>
procedural language<br>
Procedural Language/SQL<br>
procedure<br>
process<br>
Process and Experiment Automation Real-Time Language<br>
Process Design Language 2<br>
process ID<br>
process identifier DONE<br>
processor<br>
Processor Direct Slot<br>
processor farm<br>
processor time<br>
process scheduling<br>
process table<br>
PROCOL<br>
Procomm<br>
Procrustean string<br>
Prodigy<br>
ProDoc<br>
product<br>
production system<br>
Professional Graphics Adapter<br>
Professional Office System<br>
professional programming<br>
PROFILE<br>
profile<br>
PROFS<br>
PROGENY<br>
proglet<br>
program<br>
Program Composition Notation<br>
program counter<br>
Program Design Language<br>
Program Evaluation and Review Technique<br>
Program Information File<br>
Programmable Airline Reservation System<br>
Programmable Array Logic<br>
Programmable Logic Controller<br>
Programmable Read-Only Memory<br>
Programmed Data Processor<br>
PROgrammed Graph REwriting Systems<br>
programmer<br>
Programmer Brain Damage<br>
Programmer's Cheer<br>
Programmers Hierarchical Interactive Graphics System<br>
PROgrammer's Microapplication Language<br>
Programmer's Switch<br>
programming<br>
programming fluid<br>
programming language<br>
Programming Language/Cornell<br>
Programming Language/Systems<br>
Program Temporary Fix<br>
program transformation<br>
Prograph DONE<br>
PROGRES<br>
progressive coding<br>
Progressive JPEG<br>
progressive/sequential coding<br>
PROJECT<br>
project assurance<br>
Project Athena<br>
Project Guardian<br>
projection<br>
projective plane<br>
Project MAC<br>
project management<br>
project planning<br>
Prolog<br>
Prolog++<br>
Prolog-2<br>
Prolog-D-Linda<br>
Prolog-II<br>
Prolog-III<br>
Prolog-Linda<br>
Prolog/Mali<br>
PROM<br>
PROMAL<br>
Prometheus<br>
promiscuous mode<br>
PROM monitor<br>
pron<br>
Pronet<br>
Pronunciation<br>
proof<br>
PROOF/L<br>
proof theory<br>
propeller head<br>
propeller key<br>
Proposal Writing<br>
propositional calculus<br>
proprietary<br>
PROSE<br>
ProSet<br>
PROSPER<br>
Prospero<br>
ProTalk<br>
protected mode<br>
PROTEUS<br>
protocol<br>
protocol<br>
protocol analyser<br>
protocol converter<br>
Protocol Data Unit<br>
protocol layer<br>
protocol stack<br>
PROTON<br>
Protosynthex<br>
Prototyper<br>
prototyping<br>
provably difficult<br>
provably unsolvable<br>
provider<br>
provocative maintenance<br>
prowler<br>
proxy ARP<br>
proxy gateway<br>
Proxy Server<br>
proxy server<br>
PS<br>
PS/2 DONE<br>
PS 440<br>
PSA<br>
PS-ALGOL<br>
pSather<br>
PSD<br>
PSDN<br>
pseudo<br>
Pseudocode<br>
pseudoprime<br>
pseudo-random number<br>
PseudoScheme<br>
pseudosuit<br>
pseudo-tty<br>
PSF<br>
PSI<br>
Psion Organiser<br>
PSK<br>
PSL<br>
PSL/PSA<br>
PSML<br>
PSN<br>
PSTN<br>
psychedelicware<br>
psyton<br>
pt<br>
P-TAC<br>
ptc<br>
PTF<br>
Pthreads<br>
PTI<br>
PTN<br>
Ptolemy<br>
PTT<br>
PUB<br>
public directory<br>
public domain<br>
public domain software<br>
public-key cryptography<br>
Public-Key Cryptography Standards<br>
public-key encryption<br>
Public Key Infrastructure<br>
Public Switched Telephone Network<br>
puff<br>
PUFFT<br>
pull<br>
pull-down list<br>
pull-down menu<br>
pull media<br>
Pulse Code Modulation<br>
pumpkin<br>
pumpkineer<br>
pumpking<br>
punch card<br>
punched card<br>
punt<br>
Purdue Compiler-Construction Tool Set<br>
Purdue University<br>
pure functional language<br>
pure lambda-calculus<br>
PureLink<br>
Pure Lisp<br>
purely functional language<br>
Purify<br>
Purple Book<br>
purple wire<br>
Purveyor<br>
push<br>
push-button<br>
Push Down List<br>
push media<br>
PVC<br>
PVM<br>
PV-WAVE<br>
pw<br>
py<br>
Python<br>
Q<br>
QA<br>
qa<br>
QA4<br>
QAM<br>
Qbasic<br>
QBE<br>
QCA<br>
qdjanus<br>
QDOS<br>
QEMM386<br>
QIC<br>
QL<br>
Qlambda<br>
QLISP<br>
QLOG<br>
QMW<br>
Q'NIAL<br>
QNX DONE<br>
QoS<br>
QPE<br>
QT-OBJECTS<br>
QTRADER<br>
quad<br>
Quadralay Corporation<br>
Quadrature Amplitude Modulation<br>
quadruple bucky<br>
quadruplex<br>
Quake<br>
Qualcomm<br>
quality<br>
quality assurance<br>
quality control<br>
quality of service<br>
Quality Systems &amp<br> Software Ltd.<br>
quantifier<br>
Quantify<br>
quantum<br>
quantum bogodynamics<br>
quantum cell<br>
quantum cell wire<br>
quantum computer<br>
quantum computing<br>
quantum dot<br>
Quantum-dot Cellular Automata<br>
quarter<br>
Quarter Inch Cartridge<br>
Quay Financial Software<br>
QUEASY<br>
Queen Mary and Westfield College<br>
Queens Problem<br>
Queens Puzzle<br>
Queen's University<br>
QUEL<br>
query<br>
Query By Example<br>
query expansion<br>
ques<br>
Quest<br>
question mark<br>
queue<br>
QUICK<br>
quick-and-dirty<br>
QuickDraw<br>
Quicksilver<br>
Quicksort<br>
Quicktime<br>
quiesce<br>
quiesce time<br>
QUIKSCRIPT<br>
QUIKTRAN<br>
QUIN<br>
quine<br>
Quintec-Objects<br>
quintillion<br>
Quintus Prolog<br>
quote chapter and verse<br>
quotient<br>
Qu-Prolog<br>
Quty<br>
quux<br>
qux<br>
QWERTY<br>
QX<br>

</doc>
<doc id="11335" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11335" title="Wikipedia:Free On-line Dictionary of Computing/X - Z">
Wikipedia:Free On-line Dictionary of Computing/X - Z

X DONE<br>
X-1 NO IMPORT - insignificant<br> 
X11R4 NO IMPORT - insignificant<br>
X11R5 NO IMPORT - insignificant<br>
X11R6 NO IMPORT - insignificant<br>
X.12 NO IMPORT - insignificant<br>
X2 NO IMPORT - insignificant, out-dated.<br>
X.208 DONE<br>
X.209 DONE<br>
X.21<br>
X.214 NO IMPORT - duplicate info.<br>
X.215 NO IMPORT - duplicate info.<br>
X.216 NO IMPORT - duplicate info.<br>
X.217<br>
X.219<br>
X.224<br>
X.225<br>
X.226<br>
X.227<br>
X.229<br>
X.25 DONE<br>
X.28<br>
X.29<br>
X.3<br>
X3J16<br>
X3T10<br>
X.400<br>
X.409<br>
X.500 DONE<br>
X.680 DONE<br>
X.75<br>
x86 DONE<br>
x86 processor socket NO IMPORT - duplicate info.<br>
XA<br>
Xaw<br>
Xbase<br>
xbeeb<br>
xbm<br>
XC<br>
X client<br>
X Consortium<br>
Xcoral<br>
xdbx<br>
X-Designer<br>
X.desktop<br>
XDL<br>
XDR<br>
XDS 940<br>
xDSL DONE<br>
Xemacs<br>
XENIX<br>
Xeon<br>
XEROX Corporation DONE<br>
Xerox Data Systems Model 940<br>
XEROX Network Services DONE<br> 
XEROX PARC DONE<br>
XFree86 Project, Inc. NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
Xfun<br>
XGA DONE<br>
XGA-2 DONE<br>
XHTML DONE<br>
Xi<br>
XIE<br>
Xilinx, Inc.<br>
Xilinx Netlist Format<br>
X Image Extension<br>
Xlib<br>
xlisp<br>
xls<br>
XML DONE<br>
XMM<br>
XMODEM<br>
XMODEM-1K<br>
xmosaic<br>
XMS<br>
XNF<br>
xnf2ver<br>
XNS DONE<br>
XOFF<br>
XON<br>
XON/XOFF<br>
Xopen<br>
X/Open<br>
X/open Portability Guide<br>
X/Open System Interface<br>
xor<br>
XPC<br>
XperCASE<br>
XPG<br>
XPG3<br>
XPL<br>
xpm<br>
XPOP<br>
X protocol<br>
xref<br>
XRemote<br>
XRN<br>
XSB<br>
XScheme<br>
x-scm<br>
X server<br>
XSI<br>
XSL DONE<br>
XT<br>
Xt<br>
XT bus architecture -- DONE<br>
xterm DONE<br>
X terminal<br>
XTI<br>
XTP<br>
XTRAN<br>
XUI<br>
Xv++<br>
XVGA <br>
XView DONE<br>
XVT<br>
X-Windows NO IMPORT<br>
X Window System DONE<br>
XWIP<br>
xxgdb<br>
XXX<br>
Xy-pic<br>
xyzzy DONE<br>
Y<br>
Y2K DONE<br>
YA-<br>
Yaa<br>
YABA<br>
yacc DONE<br>
YADE<br>
YAFIYGI<br>
Yahoo DONE<br>
Yale Haskell<br>
Yamaha<br>
yank<br>
YAPS<br>
YASOS<br>
YAUN<br>
Yay<br>
ye<br>
Year 2000 NO IMPORT<br>
Yellow<br>
Yellow Book<br>
"Yellow Book" CD-ROM<br>
Yellow Book, Jargon<br>
Yellow Box<br>
Yellow Pages DONE<br>
yellow wire<br>
Yerk<br>
Yet Another DONE<br>
Yet Another Compiler Compiler DONE<br>
Yet Another Yacc<br>
YGMTPO<br>
YLISP<br>
YMMV<br>
YMODEM<br>
YMODEM-G<br>
yocto-<br>
yotta-<br>
yottabyte DONE<br>
You are not expected to understand this<br>
You know you've been hacking too long when... NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
Yourdon<br>
Yourdon/Constantine<br>
Yourdon/Demarco<br>
Yourdon, Inc.<br>
Yourdon methodology<br>
Your mileage may vary<br>
Yow!<br>
yoyo mode<br>
YP DONE<br>
YSM<br>
yt<br>
YTalk<br>
yu NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
Yu-Shiang Whole Fish NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
Z<br>
Z++<br>
Z180<br>
Z3<br>
Z39.50<br>
Z8<br>
Z80 DONE<br>
Z8000<br>
za<br>
ZAP<br>
zap<br>
ZAPP<br>
Z-buffer<br>
ZEBRA<br>
Zed<br>
Zen<br>
zen<br>
ZENO<br>
zepto<br>
Zermelo Fränkel set theory<br>
Zermelo set theory<br>
ZERO<br>
zero<br>
Zero and Add Packed<br>
zero assignment<br>
zero-content<br>
Zero Insertion Force<br>
zeroth<br>
ZEST<br>
ZetaLisp<br>
zetta-<br>
zettabyte DONE<br>
Zeus<br>
ZFC<br>
ZF expression<br>
ZIF<br>
zigamorph<br>
ZIL<br>
Zilog DONE<br>
Zilog Z280<br>
Zilog Z8<br>
Zilog Z80 DONE<br>
Zilog Z8000<br>
Zilog Z80000<br>
Zilog Z80A<br>
zip<br>
Zipcode<br>
Zip Drive<br>
zip file<br>
zipperhead<br>
zm<br>
ZMODEM<br>
ZOG<br>
ZOLA Technologies<br>
zombie NO IMPORT<br>
zombie process DONE<br>
zone<br>
Zoo<br>
zoo<br>
zoom<br>
Zoomer<br>
ZOPL<br>
zorch<br>
Zork DONE<br>
zorkmid DONE<br>
zr<br>
zsh NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
Z shell DONE<br>
ZUG<br>
Zulu time<br>
ZUSE<br>
Zuse<br>
Zuse, Konrad DONE<br>
zw<br>
ZX80 DONE<br>
ZX81 DONE<br>
zxnrbl<br>
Sinclair ZX Spectrum DONE<br>
Zynet Ltd. NO IMPORT<br>
ZyXEL NO IMPORT<br>

</doc>
<doc id="11336" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11336" title="Wikipedia:Free On-line Dictionary of Computing/R - S">
Wikipedia:Free On-line Dictionary of Computing/R - S

R2000 NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
R2RS NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
R3.99RS NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
R3RS NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
R4RS NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
rabbit job NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
RACE NO IMPORT - esoteric<br>
race condition DONE<br>
RACF NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
RAD NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
Raddle NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
Radio Frequency Interference DONE<br>
radiosity DONE<br>
RADIUS NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
radix DONE<br>
RAID DONE<br>
RAIL NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
rainbow series NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
rain dance DONE<br>
RAISE NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
RAL NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
RAM DONE<br>
Rambus DRAM DONE<br>
Rambus, Inc. DONE<br>
RAMDAC DONE<br>
RAM disk DONE<br>
RAM drive DONE<br>
RAMIS II NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
RAMTRON NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
random DONE<br>
random-access memory DONE<br>
Random Access Memory Digital-to-Analog Converter DONE<br>
randomness NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
random numbers NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
random testing NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
range NO IMPORT<br>
Rapid Application Development NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
RapidCAD DONE<br>
Rapidly Extensible Language, English<br>
rapid prototyping<br>
Rapidwrite NO IMPORT - esoteric<br>
RAPT NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
RARE NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
rare mode DONE<br>
RARP DONE<br>
RAS DONE<br>
RASP NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
raster NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
raster blaster NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
raster burn NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
raster font NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
rastergram DONE<br> 
raster graphics DONE<br>
raster subsystem NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
Ratatosk NO IMPORT - esoteric<br>
rat belt NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
RatC NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
Rate monotonic scheduling DONE<br>
RATFIV NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
RATFOR NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
rational NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
RATional Fortran NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
Rationalized C NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
rave NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
rave on! NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
raw data NO IMPORT' - non-encyclopedic<br>
raw mode NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
RAWOOP-SNAP NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
Rayleigh distribution NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
ray tracing DONE<br>
R:BASE NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
RBASIC NO IMPORT - esoteric<br>
RBCSP NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
RBOC DONE<br>
rc<br>
RC4 DONE<br>
RCA 1802<br>
RCA 1805<br>
RCC<br>
rc file<br>
RCL<br>
rcp<br>
RCS DONE<br>
Rdb<br>
rdb<br>
RDBA<br>
RDBMS DONE<br>
RDF DONE<br>
RDI<br>
RDL<br>
RDOS<br>
RDRAM<br>
RDS<br>
RE<br>
re<br>
README file<br>
Read-Only Memory<br>
read-only user<br>
real<br>
RealAudio DONE<br>
real estate<br>
real hack<br>
reality check<br>
real mode DONE<br>
real number DONE<br>
real operating system<br>
Real Programmer<br>
Real Programmers Don't Use Pascal<br>
Real Soon Now<br>
real-time DONE<br>
Realtime Disk Operating System DONE<br>
Real-Time Euclid<br>
Real-Time Mentat<br>
Real-Time Object-Oriented Modeling<br>
Real-Time Operating System DONE<br>
Real-Time Pascal<br>
Real Time Streaming Protocol DONE<br>
real-time structured analysis NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
real user NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
Real World NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
reaper NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
reassembly NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
reboot NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
REC NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
recipe NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
recipient NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
Recital NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
RECOL NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
Recommended Standard NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
record NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
Record Management Services DONE<br>
Record Separator NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
rectangle slinger NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
recurse NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
recursion DONE<br>
recursion theory NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
recursive DONE<br>
recursive acronym DONE<br>
recursive definition NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
recursive descent parser DONE<br>
Recursive Functional Algorithmic Language NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
Recursive Macro Actuated Generator NO IMPORT - esoteric<br>
recursive type DONE<br>
Red NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
Red Book DONE<br>
Red Brick Intelligent SQL NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
Redcode NO IMPORT- jargon<br>
redex NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
Red Hat DONE<br>
RediLisp NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
redirection NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
redirector DONE<br>
RedNet Ltd. NO IMPORT - not noteworthy<br>
redocumentation NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
REDUCE NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
Reduced Instruction Set Computer DONE<br>
reduction NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
reduction strategy NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
redundancy NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
Redundant Array of Inexpensive Disks DONE<br>
Redundant Arrays of Independent Disks DONE<br>
Redundant Arrays of Inexpensive Disks DONE<br>
red wire<br>
red zone<br>
re-engineering<br>
re-entrant<br>
refactoring DONE<br>
REFAL<br>
REF-ARF<br>
reference<br>
reference counting DONE<br>
referential integrity<br>
referentially transparent<br>
referential transparency DONE<br>
referer<br>
referrer<br>
REFINE<br>
Refined C<br>
Refined Fortran<br>
reflexive<br>
reflexive domain<br>
Reflexive transitive closure<br>
RefLisp<br>
refresh<br>
refreshable braille display DONE<br>
refreshable display<br>
refresh rate<br>
refutable<br>
regex DONE<br>
regexp DONE<br>
Regina<br>
regional network<br>
register DONE<br>
register allocation<br>
register assignment<br>
register dancing<br>
register set<br>
register spilling DONE<br>
Register Transfer Language DONE<br>
regression DONE<br>
regression testing DONE<br>
REG-SYMBOLIC<br>
REGTRAL<br>
regular expression DONE<br>
regular graph DONE<br>
rehi<br>
Reid, Brian<br>
reify<br>
reincarnation, cycle of<br>
reinvent the wheel<br>
relation<br>
relational algebra<br>
relational calculus<br>
relational database DONE<br>
relational database management system DONE<br>
relational data model<br>
relational DBMS DONE<br>
relational language<br>
relational model DONE<br>
RELATIVE<br>
relatively prime DONE<br>
relative pathname<br>
Relative Record Data Set<br>
RELCODE<br>
release<br>
released version<br>
REL English<br>
relevance<br>
reliability<br>
Reliability, Availability, Serviceability<br>
reliable communication<br>
religion of CHI<br>
religious issues<br>
REM<br>
remailer<br>
Remote Access Services DONE<br>
Remote Database Access<br>
remote echo<br>
Remote Job Entry<br>
remote login<br>
Remote Method Invocation<br>
Remote Operations Service Element<br>
Remote Procedure Call<br>
Remote Reference Layer<br>
Remote Spooling Communication Subsystem<br>
Remote Write Protocol<br>
removable disk<br>
rendering DONE<br>
RenderMan Shading Language<br>
rendezvous<br>
REP<br>
repeat<br>
repeater DONE<br>
repeating group<br>
repeat loop<br>
repetitive strain disorder<br>
repetitive strain injury<br>
REPL<br>
replacement algorithm<br>
Replay<br>
replication<br>
replicator<br>
reply<br>
Repondez s'il vous plait<br>
Report Program Generator<br>
repository<br>
Request For Comments<br>
request for proposal<br>
Request For Technology<br>
Required-COBOL<br>
requirements<br>
Requirements Acquisition and Controlled Evolution<br>
requirements analysis<br>
Requirements Engineering<br>
Research Systems, Inc.<br>
reserved memory<br>
resolution<br>
resolver<br>
Resource Access Control Facility<br>
Resource Description Framework DONE<br>
resource fork<br>
Resource Reservation Protocol<br>
restriction<br>
Restructured EXtended eXecutor<br>
restructuring<br>
retcon<br>
RETI<br>
Retrieve<br>
retrocomputing<br>
retronym<br>
return from interrupt<br>
return from the dead<br>
Return To Zero<br>
reusability<br>
reuse<br>
Reverse Address Resolution Protocol DONE<br>
Reverse ARP DONE<br>
reverse engineering<br>
Reverse Polish Notation<br>
Revised ALGOL 60<br>
revision<br>
Revision Control System<br>
Revolutionary Surrealist Vandal Party<br>
REX<br>
REXX DONE<br>
REXXWARE<br>
RFC<br>
RFC 1014<br>
RFC 1034<br>
RFC 1035<br>
RFC 1058<br>
RFC 1081<br>
RFC 1094<br>
RFC 1112<br>
RFC 1119<br>
RFC 1123<br>
RFC 1156<br>
RFC 1157<br>
RFC 1171<br>
RFC 1208<br>
RFC 1213<br>
RFC 1267<br>
RFC 1268<br>
RFC 1304<br>
RFC 1321<br>
RFC 1334<br>
RFC 1341<br>
RFC 1347<br>
RFC 1350<br>
RFC 1388<br>
RFC 1436<br>
RFC 1441<br>
RFC 1442<br>
RFC 1443<br>
RFC 1444<br>
RFC 1445<br>
RFC 1446<br>
RFC 1447<br>
RFC 1448<br>
RFC 1449<br>
RFC 1450<br>
RFC 1451<br>
RFC 1452<br>
RFC 1475<br>
RFC 1508<br>
RFC 1509<br>
RFC 1520<br>
RFC 1521<br>
RFC 1526<br>
RFC 1531<br>
RFC 1550<br>
RFC 1561<br>
RFC 1568<br>
RFC 1591<br>
RFC 1630<br>
RFC 1661<br>
RFC 1700<br>
RFC 1701<br>
RFC 1702<br>
RFC 1707<br>
RFC 1730<br>
RFC 1756<br>
RFC 1760<br>
RFC 1777<br>
RFC 1778<br>
RFC 1823<br>
RFC 1825<br>
RFC 1861<br>
RFC 1938<br>
RFC 1951<br>
RFC 1959<br>
RFC 1960<br>
RFC 2045<br>
RFC 2046<br>
RFC 2047<br>
RFC 2048<br>
RFC 2049<br>
RFC 2060<br>
RFC 2061<br>
RFC 2068<br>
RFC 2093<br>
RFC 2131<br>
RFC 2234<br>
RFC 2236<br>
RFC 2279<br>
RFC 2298<br>
RFC 2326<br>
RFC 2408<br>
RFC 2543<br>
RFC 792<br>
RFC 822<br>
RFC 826<br>
RFC 854<br>
RFC 903<br>
RFC 959<br>
RFE<br>
RFI<br>
RFP<br>
RFT<br>
RG58<br>
RGB DONE<br>
Rhapsody<br>
rib site<br>
rice box<br>
Richard Gabriel<br>
Richard P. Gabriel<br>
Richard Stallman DONE<br>
rich object<br>
Rich Text Format DONE<br>
RIFF<br>
RIGAL<br>
Rigel<br>
right brace<br>
right bracket<br>
right-click<br>
right outer join<br>
right parenthesis<br>
Right Thing<br>
Rijndael DONE<br>
ring network<br>
ring topology<br>
Riordan's Internet Privacy Enhanced Mail<br>
RIP DONE<br>
RIPE<br>
RIPEM<br>
RISC -- DONE<br>
RISC OS<br>
Risc PC<br>
RISC System/6000<br>
RISQL<br>
RJ-11<br>
RJ-45 DONE<br>
RJE<br>
RKM<br>
RL DONE<br>
rl<br>
RLaB<br>
RLE DONE<br>
RLF<br>
RLL DONE<br>
rlogin<br>
RMAG<br>
RMAIL<br>
RMI DONE<br>
RM-ODP<br>
RMON<br>
RMS<br>
RNF<br>
ro<br>
roach<br>
ROADS<br>
Robert T. Morris<br>
ROBEX<br>
RoboHELP DONE<br>
robot<br>
robust<br>
Rockwell Protocol Interface<br>
Rocky Mountain Basic<br>
rococo<br>
roff<br>
ROFLMAO<br>
rogue<br>
rollback<br>
ROM DONE<br>
ROM BIOS DONE<br>
ROME<br>
Rom Kernel Manual<br>
room<br>
ROOM Methodology<br>
room-temperature IQ<br>
root<br>
root bridge<br>
root directory<br>
root mode<br>
root node<br>
Root Normal Form<br>
root version<br>
ROSE<br>
Rosette<br>
Roskind grammars<br>
rot13 DONE<br>
rotary debugger<br>
rotational latency<br>
rotation per minute<br>
ROTFL<br>
ROTFLMAO<br>
ROTFLOL<br>
round-robin<br>
round tape<br>
round-trip time<br>
route DONE<br>
routed DONE<br>
route flapping DONE<br>
routeing DONE<br>
routeing domain DONE<br>
router DONE<br>
routine<br>
routing<br>
Routing Information Protocol DONE<br>
Routing Table Maintenance Protocol DONE<br>
row<br>
row-level locking<br>
Royal Veterinary and Agricultural University<br>
RPC DONE<br>
RPG<br>
RPI<br>
RPL<br>
RPL-1<br>
RPM DONE<br>
rpm DONE<br>
RPN<br>
Répondez s'il vous plait<br>
RPT<br>
RRL<br>
RRS<br>
RS<br>
RS-232 DONE<br>
RS-232C<br>
RS-232D<br>
RS-422<br>
RS-423<br>
RS-449<br>
RS-485<br>
RS6000 DONE<br>
RS/6000 DONE<br>
RS6K DONE<br>
RSA<br>
RSA Data Security, Inc.<br>
RSA encryption NO IMPORT<br>
RSCS<br>
Réseaux Associés pour la Recherche Européenne<br>
Réseaux IP Européens<br>
RS flip-flop<br>
rsh<br>
RSI<br>
RSL<br>
RSN<br>
rstat<br>
RSTS/E<br>
RSVP<br>
RTBM<br>
RTC++<br>
RT-CDL<br>
RTEE<br>
RTF DONE<br>
RTFAQ<br>
RTFB<br>
RTFM NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
RTFS<br>
RTI<br>
RTL<br>
RTL/1<br>
RTL/2<br>
RTM<br>
RTMP DONE<br>
RTOS<br>
RT-PC<br>
RTS<br>
RTSA<br>
RTSP DONE<br>
RTT<br>
RTTI<br>
ru<br>
rubi DONE<br>
Ruby DONE<br>
rude<br>
RUFL<br>
run<br>
RUNCIBLE<br>
runes NO IMPORT<br>
runic NO IMPORT<br>
run-length encoding DONE<br>
run time<br>
run-time environment<br>
run-time error<br>
run-time library<br>
run-time support<br>
run-time system<br>
Run-Time Type Information<br>
ruptime<br>
RUSH<br>
Russell<br>
Russell, Bertrand<br>
Russell's Attic<br>
Russell's Paradox<br>
rusty iron<br>
rusty memory<br>
RUTH<br>
rw<br>
rwho<br>
RWP<br>
Rx<br>
S<br>
s///<br>
S3<br>
SA<br>
sa NO IMPORT<br>
SA-110<br>
SAA<br>
Saber-C<br>
Saber-C++<br>
SAC<br>
SAC-1<br>
SAC2<br>
sacadm<br>
sacred NO IMPORT<br>
SAD<br>
SAD SAM<br>
SADT<br>
SAFARI<br>
safe<br>
safety<br>
safety-critical system<br>
saga<br>
sagan<br>
SAGE DONE<br>
SAIC<br>
SAID<br>
SAIL<br>
SAINT<br>
Saint Andrews Static Language<br>
SAL<br>
SALEM<br>
Sales Automation<br>
salescritter<br>
Sales Force Automation<br>
S-ALGOL<br>
SALT<br>
salt<br>
salt mines<br>
salt substrate<br>
SAM<br>
sam<br>
SAM76<br>
Samba DONE<br>
SAME<br>
same-day service<br>
SAMeDL<br>
samizdat DONE<br>
Sammet, Jean E.<br>
sample DONE<br>
sample rate NO IMPORT<br>
sampling DONE<br>
sampling frequency DONE<br>
samurai<br>
sandbender<br>
sandbox<br>
Sandman<br>
San Francisco<br>
sanity check<br>
Santa Cruz Operation DONE<br>
SAP DONE<br>
SAP AG NO IMPORT<br>
SAPI<br>
SAR<br>
SAS<br>
SASD<br>
SASE<br>
SASI<br>
SASL<br>
SASL+LV<br>
SASL-YACC<br>
SAS System<br>
SATAN<br>
Sather<br>
Sather-K<br>
satisfiability problem<br>
Saturday-night special<br>
SAVE<br>
say<br>
sb<br>
SB AWE32<br>
SBCS<br>
SBD<br>
SBM<br>
SB-Prolog<br>
SBus<br>
SC<br>
sc<br>
SCA<br>
SCADA<br>
scag<br>
scalability<br>
Scalable Coherent Interface<br>
Scalable Processor ARChitecture<br>
Scalable Vector Graphics<br>
scalar<br>
SCALLOP<br>
SCAN<br>
scan<br>
scan design<br>
SCANDISK<br>
Scan-EDF<br>
scanf<br>
Scan-In, Scan-Out<br>
scan line<br>
scanner<br>
scanno<br>
scan path<br>
scan register<br>
SCC<br>
SCCS<br>
SCEPTRE<br>
scheduler DONE<br>
scheduling DONE<br>
Scheduling API<br>
Scheduling Application Programming Interface<br>
Schelog<br>
Schema Definition Set<br>
Schema Representation language<br>
schematic capture<br>
schematic type variable<br>
Schematik<br>
Scheme<br>
Scheme84<br>
Scheme88<br>
Scheme-&gt<br>C<br>
Scheme Library<br>
Scheme-Linda<br>
Scheme Object System<br>
Scheme Repository<br>
Scheme-to-C<br>
Schlaer-Mellor<br>
Schoonschip<br>
schroedinbug<br>
SCI<br>
Science and Engineering Research Council<br>
science-fiction fandom<br>
Scientific Data Systems<br>
SCL<br>
SCM<br>
SC/MP<br>
SCO<br>
Scode<br>
SCOOP<br>
SCOOPS<br>
SCOPE<br>
scope<br>
Scorpion<br>
Scott-closed<br>
Scott domain<br>
SCPI<br>
SCPI Consortium<br>
scram switch<br>
SCRAP<br>
scratch<br>
scratch disk<br>
scratch monkey<br>
Scratchpad I<br>
Scratchpad II<br>
scream and die<br>
Screamer<br>
screaming tty<br>
screen blanker<br>
Screen Peace<br>
screen reader<br>
screen refresh<br>
screen saver<br>
screen scraper<br>
screen sharing<br>
Screenwrite<br>
screw<br>
screwage<br>
scribble<br>
Scribe<br>
SCRIPT<br>
script<br>
Scriptics<br>
scripting language<br>
scrog<br>
SCROLL<br>
scroll<br>
scrollable list<br>
scroll bar<br>
scrolling<br>
scrool<br>
scrozzle<br>
scruffies<br>
SCSI<br>
SCSI-1<br>
SCSI-2<br>
SCSI-3<br>
SCSI adaptor<br>
SCSI controller<br>
SCSI ID<br>
SCSI initiator<br>
SCSI interface<br>
SCSI reconnect<br>
SCSI target<br>
ScumOS<br>
scuzzy<br>
SD<br>
sd<br>
SDDI<br>
SDE<br>
SDF<br>
SDH<br>
SDI<br>
SDK<br>
SDL<br>
SDL 92<br>
SDLC<br>
SDM<br>
SDMS<br>
SDRAM<br>
SDRC<br>
SDR-RAM<br>
SDR-SDRAM<br>
SDS<br>
SDS 92<br>
SDS 940<br>
SDSL<br>
SE<br>
se<br>
SEA<br>
Seagate Technology<br>
SEAL<br>
search-and-destroy mode<br>
search engine<br>
search problem<br>
search term<br>
SEC<br>
SECC<br>
SECD machine<br>
secondary cache<br>
secondary damage<br>
secondary key<br>
secondary storage<br>
second generation computer<br>
second generation language<br>
second level cache<br>
second normal form<br>
Second-Order Lambda-calculus<br>
second-system effect<br>
sector interleave<br>
sector interleaving<br>
sector map<br>
sector mapping<br>
Secure Multipurpose Internet Mail Extensions<br>
Secure Shell -- DONE<br>
Secure Sockets Layer<br>
Security Administrator's Integrated Network Tool<br>
Security Association<br>
Security Association ID<br>
security through obscurity DONE<br>
SED<br>
Sed<br>
SEE<br>
seek<br>
seeking<br>
seek time<br>
SEESAW<br>
see u see me<br>
SEGA<br>
segfault<br>
seggie<br>
segment<br>
segmentation<br>
segmentation and reassembly<br>
segmentation fault<br>
segmented address space<br>
segv<br>
SEI<br>
Seiko RC-4000<br>
SEL<br>
Selective Dissemination of Information<br>
selector<br>
Self<br>
Self-Extensible Language<br>
Self Extracting Archive<br>
self-reference<br>
selvage<br>
SEM<br>
semantic gap DONE<br>
semantic network<br>
semantics<br>
semaphore<br>
semi<br>
Semi-Automatic Ground Environment<br>
semicolon<br>
semiconductor<br>
Semidetached Mode<br>
SENDIT<br>
sendmail<br>
sendmail.cf<br>
Sendmail Inc.<br>
Seneca<br>
senior bit<br>
sensor<br>
sentence<br>
SE-OsdasfdffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffDP<br>
SEP<br>
SEPIA<br>
SEPP<br>
Seque<br>
Sequel<br>
Sequenced Packet Exchange<br>
sequencer<br>
Sequent DONE<br>
sequential coding<br>
sequential file matching<br>
Sequential Parlog Machine<br>
sequential processing<br>
SERC<br>
SERCOS<br>
serial communications interface<br>
Serial Interface Adaptor<br>
serial line<br>
Serial Line Internet Protocol<br>
Serial Line IP<br>
serial port<br>
Serial Presence Detect<br>
serial processing<br>
Serial Storage Architecture<br>
serve<br>
servelet<br>
server<br>
serverlet<br>
Server Message Block<br>
server-parsed HTML<br>
server room<br>
servers<br>
server-side include<br>
service<br>
serviceability<br>
Service Access Point<br>
Service Advertising Protocol<br>
service provider<br>
servlet<br>
session<br>
Session Initiation Protocol<br>
session layer<br>
SES/workbench<br>
SET<br>
set<br>
set abstraction<br>
set associative cache<br>
set complement<br>
set comprehension<br>
Setext<br>
SETL<br>
SETL2<br>
SETL/E<br>
Set Priority Level<br>
SETS<br>
set theory<br>
set-top box<br>
SEUS<br>
seven layer model<br>
SEX<br>
sexadecimal<br>
sex changer<br>
SEXI<br>
Seymour Cray<br>
SFA<br>
SFBI<br>
SFD-ALGOL<br>
SFFA<br>
SFL<br>
SFLV<br>
sg<br>
SGCP<br>
SGI<br>
SGML<br>
sgmls<br>
SGML Tagger<br>
SGRAM<br>
sh<br>
SHACO<br>
SHADOW<br>
shadowing<br>
shadow ram<br>
shallow binding<br>
shambolic link<br>
Shape_VC<br>
ShapeTools<br>
shar<br>
sharchive<br>
Share and enjoy!<br>
shared memory<br>
Shared Time Repair of Big Electronic Systems<br>
shareware<br>
shar file<br>
sharp<br>
Sharp APL<br>
S-HDSL<br>
shebang<br>
SHEEP<br>
shelf<br>
shelfware<br>
SHELL<br>
shell<br>
shell out<br>
shell script<br>
shell variable<br>
shielded twisted pair<br>
SHIFT<br>
Shift In<br>
shift left logical<br>
Shift Out<br>
shift right logical<br>
shim<br>
shit hit the fan<br>
shitogram<br>
Shockwave<br>
shockwave<br>
Shockwave Flash<br>
shopbot<br>
short card<br>
Short Code<br>
shortcut<br>
shortest job first<br>
Short Message Service<br>
shotgun debugging<br>
shovelware<br>
Show-And-Tell<br>
showstopper<br>
shriek<br>
sht<br>
SHTF<br>
shtml<br>
Shub-Internet<br>
SHUG<br>
Shugart, Alan F.<br>
Shugart Associates<br>
Shugart Technology<br>
SI<br>
si<br>
SIA<br>
SICL<br>
SICS<br>
SICStus Prolog<br>
sidecar<br>
side-effect<br>
Siemens<br>
Siemens Nixdorf Informationssteme, AG<br>
Sierra<br>
SIFT<br>
SIG<br>
Sig<br>
sig<br>
sig block<br>
SIGBUS<br>
SIGhyper<br>
SIGLA<br>
SIGMA<br>
SIGNAL<br>
signal<br>
signalling rate<br>
Signalling System 7<br>
signal-to-noise ratio<br>
signature<br>
sig quote<br>
sig virus<br>
SIL<br>
Silage<br>
silicon<br>
silicon chip<br>
Silicon Graphics, Inc.<br>
Siliwood<br>
silly walk<br>
silo<br>
Silver Book<br>
silver bullet<br>
SIMAN<br>
SimCity<br>
SimCity 2000<br>
SIMD DONE<br>
Similix<br>
SIML/I<br>
SIMM<br>
Simone<br>
Simonyi, Charles<br>
SIMPAC<br>
SIMPAS<br>
SIMPL<br>
SIMPLE<br>
Simple Authentication and Security Layer<br>
Simple Gateway Control Protocol<br>
Simple Mail Transfer Protocol<br>
simple multicast protocol<br>
Simple Network Management Protocol<br>
Simple Network Management Protocol version 2<br>
Simple Network Paging Protocol<br>
Simple Object Access Protocol<br>
simplex<br>
simplex method<br>
simplex printer<br>
SIMPL/I<br>
Simplified Multicast Routing Protocol<br>
SIMPL-T<br>
SIMSCRIPT<br>
SIMSCRIPT I.5<br>
SIMSCRIPT II.5<br>
simship<br>
SIMULA<br>
SIMULA 67<br>
SIMULA I<br>
simulated annealing<br>
Simulating Digital Systems<br>
simulation<br>
SIMulation ANalysis<br>
Simulation Language for Alternative Modeling<br>
Simulation Oriented Language<br>
Simultaneous Engineering Environment<br>
Simultaneous Peripheral Operation On-Line<br>
simultaneous shipment<br>
Simware, Inc.<br>
SINA<br>
since time T equals minus infinity<br>
Sinclair, Clive<br>
Sinclair PC200<br>
Sinclair Radionics<br>
Sinclair Research<br>
sine wave<br>
single assignment<br>
Single ASsignment Language<br>
single-attached<br>
Single Connection Attach<br>
Single Connector Attachment<br>
Single Data Rate Random Access Memory<br>
Single Data Rate Synchronous Dynamic Random Access Memory<br>
Single Document Interface<br>
single-duplex<br>
Single Edge Contact<br>
Single Edge Contact Cartridge<br>
Single Edge Processor Package<br>
single-electron transistor NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
Single Electron Tunneling NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
Single Electron Tunneling Technology NO IMPORT - esoteric<br>
single ended NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
Single Image Random Dot Stereogram DONE<br>
single inheritance NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
Single In-line Memory Module NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
Single Inline Pin Package NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
Single Instruction Multiple Data NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
Single Instruction/Multiple Data NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
Single-line Digital Subscriber Line NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
Single-pair High Speed Digital Subscriber Line NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
single quote NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
single sourcing NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
singleton variable DONE<br>
Single Virtual Storage NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
siod NO IMPORT - esoteric<br>
SIP NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
SIPB NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
SIPLAN NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
SIPP NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
Siprol NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
SIR NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
SIRDS NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
Siri NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
SIRTS NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
SISAL - DONE<br>
sit NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
SITBOL NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
sitename - DONE<br>
sj NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
sk NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
Skel-ML<br>
Sketchpad NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
S/Key NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
Skill NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
Skim NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
SkipJack NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
SKOL NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
skolemisation NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
S-K reduction machine NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
skrog NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
SKsh NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
SKU NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
skulker NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
SL NO IMPORT - esoteric<br>
sl NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
SL5 NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
slack NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
slackware NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
SLAM NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
SLANG NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
S-Lang NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
slap on the side NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
slash NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
slashdot effect NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
slave tty NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
SLD resolution NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
sleep NO IMPORT - insubstantial, jargon<br>
SLIB NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
SLIM NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
slim NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
Slingshot NO IMPORT - esoteric<br>
SLIP DONE - merged with Serial line IP<br>
SlipKnot NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
SLIPS NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
SLiRP NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
SLLIC NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
slog NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
Sloop NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
slop NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
slopsucker NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
Slot 1 DONE<br>
Slot 2 DONE<br>
Slot A DONE<br>
slurp NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
sm NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
smail NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
SMALGOL NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
SMALL NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
Small-C NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
Small Computer System Interface NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
small-office/home-office NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
Small Outline DIMM DONE<br>
Smalltalk NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
Smalltalk-80 NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
Smalltalk/V NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
SmallVDM NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
SMALLWORLD NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
SmallWorld NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
Smarandache logic NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
SMART NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
smart NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
Smart Battery Data DONE<br>
smart card NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
Smartdrive NO IMPORT - esoteric<br>
SMARTdrv NO IMPORT - esoteric<br>
smart terminal NO IMPORT - duplicate info, obsolescent term<br>
smash case NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
smash sum<br>
smash the stack NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
SMB DONE - merged<br>
smbclient DONE - merged<br>
smblib DONE - merged<br>
SMBus DONE<br>
SMCC NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
SMDS NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
SMG NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
SMI NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
SMIL DONE - merged<br>
smiley NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
S-MIME NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
SML NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
SML# NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
sml2c DONE - merged into SML programming language<br>
SML/NJ NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
SMM NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
SMNP NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
smoke NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
smoke and mirrors NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
smoke-emitting diode NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
smoke test NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
smoking clover NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
SMoLCS NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
SMOP NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
SMP NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
SMPT NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
SMRP NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
SMS NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
SMT NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
SMTP NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
smurf NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
sn NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
SNA NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
snacc NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
snaf NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
SNAFU principle NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
snail mail NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
SNAP NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
Snappy NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
Snappy Video Snapshot NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
snarf NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
snarf & barf NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
snarf down NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
snark NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
sneakernet NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
sneck NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
snert NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
SNI NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
Sniff NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
sniff NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
sniffer NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
snivitz NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
SNMP NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
SNMP agent NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
SNMPv2 DONE - merged into SNMP<br>
SNOBOL NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
SNOBOL2 NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
SNOBOL3 NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
SNOBOL4 NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
SNOOPS NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
'Snooze NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
SNPP NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
SNR NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
S/N ratio NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
SO NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
so NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
SO 2 NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
SOAP NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
SOAR NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
social engineering NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
social science number NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
socket<br>
Socket 1<br>
Socket 2<br>
Socket 3<br>
Socket 370<br>
Socket 4<br>
Socket 5<br>
Socket 6<br>
Socket 7<br>
Socket 8<br>
SOCKS NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
SOCRATIC NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
SODA NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
SODAS NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
SO-DIMM NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
Sod's Law NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
SoftBench NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
soft boot NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
softcopy NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
Softlab NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
soft link NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
SoftModem NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
software NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
Software AG NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
software audit NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
Software BackPlane NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
software bloat NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
Software bus NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
Software Description Database NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
Software Developers Kit NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
software development life cycle NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
software enabling NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
software engineering NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
Software Engineering Environment NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
software handshaking NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
software interruptNO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
software laser NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
software law DONE<br>
software life-cycle NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
Software Method NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
Software Methodology NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
software metric NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
software patent NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
software piracy NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
software pirate NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
Software Practice and Experience NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
Software Productivity Centre NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
Software Publishing Corporation NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
software reliability NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
software rot NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
software theft DONE<br>
Software through Pictures NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
software tool NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
Software Verification Research Centre NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
softwarily NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
softy NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
SOH NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
SOHIO NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
SoHo NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
SOIF NO IMPORT - esoteric<br>
SOJ NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
SOL NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
Solaris NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
Solaris Operating Environment NO IMPORT - not in FOLDOC?<br>
solid-state storage device<br>
SOLO NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
solution NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
Solution Based Modelling NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
Solve NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
SOM NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
Somar DumpAcl NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
Somar Software NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
some random X NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
Sonata NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
SONET NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
Sony Playstation NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
SORCERER "'NO IMPORT" - esoteric<br>
sorcerer's apprentice mode NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
sort NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
sorting NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
SOS NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
sound NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
Sound Blaster NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
sound card NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
soundex NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
source NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
source code NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
source code escrow NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
source language NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
source of all good bits NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
source package NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
source route NO IMPORT - esoteric<br>
source routing NO IMPORT - esoteric<br>
southbridge NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
SP NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
SP2 NO IMPORT - out-of-date<br>
SP/2 NO IMPORT - out-of-date<br>
space NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
space-cadet keyboard DONE<br>
space complexity NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
space leak<br>
SPACEWAR NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
SPADE NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
spaghetti code NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
spaghetti inheritance NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
spam NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
spamdex NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
spamming NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
spanning tree algorithm NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
SPAR NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
SPARC NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
SPARC International, Inc. NO IMPORT - merged with SPARC<br>
SPARCStation<br>
SPARCstation 10<br>
SPARCstation 20<br>
SPARCsystem 4<br>
SPARC Xterminal 1<br>
SPARK NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
SPARKS NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
sparse NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
Spatial Technologies NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
spawn NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
SPC NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
SPD NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
SPDL NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
SPE NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
Speakeasy NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
speaker NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
SPEC<br>
Spec<br>
spec<br>
SPECbase_fp92<br>
SPECbase_int92<br>
SPECbaserate<br>
SPEC CFP92<br>
SPEC CINT92<br>
SPECfp92<br>
SPECIAL NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
special-case NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
Special Interest Group NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
specialisation NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
specification NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
specific markup NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
SPECint92<br>
SPECmark<br>
SPECmark89<br>
SPECOL NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
SPEC rate<br>
SPECrate_base_fp92<br>
SPECrate_fp92<br>
SPECrate_int92<br>
SPEC ratio<br>
Spectrum NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
speculative evaluation NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
speculative execution NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
Speech Application Programming Interface NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
speech recognition NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
Speech Recognition Application Program Interface NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
speech synthesis NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
SPEED NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
Speedcoding NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
Speedcoding 3 NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
SPEEDEX NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
speedometer NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
spell NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
spelling flame NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
Sperry Corporation NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
Sperry Univac NO IMPORT<br>
SPG NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
SPGA NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
Spice Lisp NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
SPID NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
spider NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
Spiderweb NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
spiffy NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
spike NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
spill NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
spin NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
spiral model NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
SPIT NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
SPITBOL NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
SP/k NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
SPL NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
SPL/1 NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
SPLash! NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
splash screen NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
splat NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
SPL/I NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
SPLINTER NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
split NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
Split-C NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
splot NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
SPLX NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
SPM NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
SPMD NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
SPML<br>
spod NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
spoiler NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
sponge NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
spoo NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
spoof NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
spoofing NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
spooge NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
SPOOL NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
Spool NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
spool NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
spooler NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
spool file NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
SpoolView NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
spreadsheet NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
spread spectrum communications NO IMPORT - duplicate info (spread-spectrum)<br>
SPRING NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
SPRINT NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
Sprintnet NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
Sprite NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
sprite NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
sprocket feed NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
SPS NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
SPSS NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
SPSS, Inc. NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
SPUR NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
SPX NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
spx NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
sqcap NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
sqcup NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
SQE NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
SQL NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
SQL2 NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
SQL3 NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
SQL Access Group NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
SQL/DS NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
SQL Module Language NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
SQL Server NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
SQL server NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
SQLWindows NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
SQR NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
SQRIBE NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
sqsubseteq NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
Square NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
square-headed boyfriend NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
square-headed girlfriend NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
square tape NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
Squeak<br>
Squiggol<br>
squirt the bird NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
SR - DONE<br>
sr NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
SRAM NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
SRAPI NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
SRC Modula-3 DONE<br>
SRDL NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
SR flip-flop DONE - merged with flip-flop<br>
SRI DONE<br>
SRI International DONE<br>
SRL NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
SRP NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
SS7 NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
SSA NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
SSADM NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
SSBA NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
ssh NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
SSI NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
SSII NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
SSL NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
S/SL DONE<br>
SSLeay NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
SSMA NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
st NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
STAB NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
STAB-11 NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
STAC NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
stac compression NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
stack NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
Stack Environment Control Dump machine NO IMPORT - duplicate info (SECD machine)<br>
stack frame<br>
stacking order NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
stack loader NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
stack overflow NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
stack pointer NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
stack puke NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
stack traceback NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
STAGE2 NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
Staggered Pin Grid Array NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
staircase NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
staircasing NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
stale pointer bug DONE<br>
Stallman, Richard M. NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
stand-alone NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
standard NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
Standard Commands for Programmable Instruments NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
Standard d'Echange et de Transfert NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
standard for robot exclusion NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
Standard for the exchange of product model data NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
Standard Generalised Markup Language NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
Standard Generalized Markup Language NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
standard input/output<br>
Standard Instrument Control Library NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
standard interpretation NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
standard I/O<br>
Standard Lisp NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
Standard ML<br>
Standard ML of New Jersey<br>
standard semantics NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
Stanford Artificial Intelligence Laboratory DONE - duplicate info<br>
Stanford Artificial Intelligence Language DONE<br>
Stanford Research Institute DONE - duplicate info<br>
Stanford University NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
Staple NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
STAR 0 NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
StarBurst NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
StarLISP DONE - Merged into Lisp programming language<br>
StarMOD NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
star network NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
Starset NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
STARSYS DONE (Convergent Technologies Operating System)<br>
start bit NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
Start Of Header NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
Start Of Text NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
start tag NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
state NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
state diagram NO IMPORT - duplicate info (finite state machine)<br>
stateless DONE<br>
state machine NO IMPORT - duplicate info (finite state machine)<br>
state transition diagram NO IMPORT - duplicate info (finite state machine)<br>
State University of New York NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
static database management system<br>
static DBMS<br>
static link NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
static RAM NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
static random access memory NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
static scope NO IMPORT - duplicate info (Static scoping)<br>
Station Management NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
Statistical Analysis System NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
Statistical Package for the Social Sciences NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
statistical time division multiplexing DONE (in my userspace, currently)<br>
statistics NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
StatMUX DONE (in my userspace, currently)<br>
STB NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
STD NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
STD 1 NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
STD 13 NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
STD 15 NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
STD 2 NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
STD 9 NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
stderr<br>
stdin<br>
stdio<br>
stdio.h<br>
STDM DONE (in my userspace, currently)<br>
stdout<br>
STDWIN NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
steam-powered NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
Steelman NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
steganography NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
stemmer DONE<br>
stemming DONE<br>
STENSOR NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
STEP NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
Stephen Cole Kleene DONE<br>
Stephen Jobs NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
Stephen Kleene DONE<br>
Stepstone Corp NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
stepwise refinement NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
Stereogram DONE<br>
Steve Jobs NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
Steve's Shell NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
Steve Wozniak NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
Sticks&Stones NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
sticky analysis NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
sticky bit<br>
sticky content NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
stiffy NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
STIL NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
STING DONE - merged into Lisp programming language<br>
STk NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
STMP NO IMPORT - irrelevant<br>
stochastic NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
stock-keeping unit NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
STOIC NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
stomp on NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
STONE NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
Stone Age NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
stone knives and bearskins NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
Stoneman NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
stop bit DONE (in my userspace, currently)<br>
stoppage NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
storage NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
Storage Allocation and Coding Program NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
Storage Management Services NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
store NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
store and forward NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
Story of Mel NO IMPORT - irrelevant<br>
STP NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
StP NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
STP4 NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
Strachey, Christopher NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
Strand NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
Strand88 NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
Stratus NO IMPORT - irrelevant<br>
Strawman NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
STREAM NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
stream DONE (in my userspace, currently)<br>
streaming NO IMPORT - duplicate info (streaming media)<br>
stream-oriented NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
STREAMS NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
strength reduction DONE<br>
STRESS NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
stress testing NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
strict<br>
strict evaluation<br>
strided NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
string NO IMPORT - duplicate info (literal string)<br>
String EXpression Interpreter NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
STring Oriented Interactive Compiler NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
String Oriented Symbolic Language NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
String PRocessING language NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
string reduction NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
stripe DONE (Data striping)<br>
stripe set DONE (Data striping)<br>
striping DONE (Data striping)<br>
STROBES NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
stroke NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
StrongARM NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
strongly connected component<br>
strongly typed NO IMPORT - duplicate info (datatype)<br>
strong typing NO IMPORT - duplicate info (datatype)<br>
Stroustrup, Bjarne NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
struct NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
structural recursion NO IMPORT - duplicate info (Structural induction)<br>
structured analysis NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
structured design NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
structure diagram NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
structured language NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
structured programming NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
Structured Query Language NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
Structure of Management Information NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
strudel NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
STRUDL NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
STSC APL NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
stub NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
stub network NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
stubroutine NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
STUDENT NO IMPORT - irrelevant<br>
Student PL/I NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
studly NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
studlycaps NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
Stuffit NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
Stupids NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
stupid-sort NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
Sturgeon's Law NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
STX NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
su NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
SUB NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
subband encoding DONE<br>
subclass NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
subject DONE - merged into subject-oriented programming<br>
subject index NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
subject-oriented programming DONE<br>
sublanguage NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
subnet NO IMPORT - duplicate info (subnetwork)<br>
subnet address NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
subnet mask NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
subnet number NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
subroutine NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
subscribe NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
subscribing NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
subseteq NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
Subset-Equational Language DONE<br>
Substitute NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
substrate NO IMPORT - duplicate info (integrated circuit)<br>
subtype NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
subtyping NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
SuccessoR NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
successor NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
sucking mud NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
Sue NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
sufficiently small NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
SUGAR NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
suicideware NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
SUIF NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
suit NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
suitably small NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
Suite Synthetique des Benchmarks de l'AFUU NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
sum NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
Summary Object Interchange Format NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
SUMMER NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
SUMMER SESSION NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
sum of products type DONE<br>
Sun NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
Sun-2 Workstation NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
Sun-3 Workstation NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
Sun-4 Workstation NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
sun lounge NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
Sun Microsystems, Inc. NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
SunOS NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
sunspots NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
sun-stools NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
SunView DONE<br>
SUNY NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
SUPER NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
Super 7 NO IMPORT - out of date<br>
superclass NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
supercombinators NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
supercompilation NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
supercomputer NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
superhighway NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
SuperJanet NO IMPORT - out of date<br>
SUPERMAC NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
Super Pascal DONE - merged into Pascal<br>
superpipelined NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
superprogrammer NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
superscalar NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
super source quench NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
SuperTalk NO IMPORT - irrelevant<br>
superuser NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
Super VGA NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
Super Video Graphics Adapter NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
Super Video Graphics Adaptor NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
Super Video Graphics Array NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
supervisor mode<br>
Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
support NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
supremum NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
Sure NO IMPORT - irrelevant<br>
surfing<br>
SURGE NO IMPORT - irrelevant<br>
surjection NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
surjective NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
surrogate key DONE<br>
suspension NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
Suzie COBOL NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
sv NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
SVC NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
SVG NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
SVGA NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
SVGA monitor NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
SVID NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
S-Video NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
SVR4 NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
SVRC NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
SVS NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
swab NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
SWAG NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
swap<br>
swap file<br>
swapped in<br>
swapped out<br>
swapping <br>
swap space DONE<br>
SweetLambda NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
SWI-Prolog NO IMPORT - irrelevant<br>
switch NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
Switched Multimegabit Data Service NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
switching hub NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
switch statement NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
swizzle NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
swung dash NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
sy NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
Sybase, Inc. NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
SYDEL NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
SYGMA NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
SYLK NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
Sylvan NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
Symantec NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
SYMBAL NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
SymbMath NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
SYMBOLANG NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
Symbolic Assembler Program NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
SYMBOLIC ASSEMBLY NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
Symbolic Automatic INTegrator NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
symbolic inference<br>
Symbolic Link DONE merged into existing article<br>
symbolic link DONE merged into existing article<br>
symbolic logic NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
Symbolic Mathematical Laboratory NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
symbolic mathematics - DONE<br>
Symbolic Optimal Assembly Program NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
Symbolics, Inc. NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
Symbol Manipulation Program NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
symlink DONE - merged with symbolic link<br>
symmetric NO IMPORT - duplicate info (Symmetry)<br>
symmetric key cryptography NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
Symmetric LISP DONE - Merged into LISP<br>
symmetric multiprocessing NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
symmetric multiprocessor NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
Symphony NO IMPORT - out of date<br>
SYMPL NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
SYN NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
sync NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
Synchronized Multimedia Integration Language DONE - merged into SMIL<br>
synchronous NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
Synchronous Data Link Control NO IMPORT - irrelevant<br>
Synchronous Digital Hierarchy NO IMPORT - duplicate info (Synchronous optical networking)<br>
Synchronous DRAM<br>
Synchronous Dynamic Random Access Memory<br>
Synchronous Graphics RAM<br>
Synchronous Graphics Random Access Memory<br>
Synchronous idle NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
synchronous key encryption NO IMPORT - duplicate info (PGP)<br>
Synchronous Optical NETwork NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
syncronous NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
synflood NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
synonym ring NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
syntactic salt DONE - (syntactic sugar)<br>
syntactic sugar DONE<br>
syntax NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
Syntax-Case<br>
syntax directed translation<br>
Syntax/Semantic Language<br>
syntax tree NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
synthesis NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
Synthesizer Specification Language NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
SyQuest Technology, Inc. DONE<br>
sysadmin NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
sysape NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
Sysdeco Mimer AB NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
sys-frog NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
SYSKEY DONE<br>
SYSLISP NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
sysop NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
Sysplex NO IMPORT - out of date<br>
sysprog NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
system<br>
System/360 NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
System 5 NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
System 7.5 NO IMPORT - duplicate info (MacOS)<br>
System Account Manager<br>
system administration NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
system administrator NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
system analysis NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
system analyst NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
system boardDONE - (motherboard)<br>
system call<br>
system catalog<br>
System F NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
system management NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
System Management Bus NO IMPORT - out of date<br>
System Management Mode NO IMPORT - out of date<br>
System Management Server<br>
system manager NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
system mangler NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
system operator NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
System Product Interpreter NO IMPORT - irrelevant<br>
system programming language DONE<br>
System R DONE - but needs expansion<br>
Systems Administrators Guild NO IMPORT - irrelevant<br>
systems analysis NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
Systems Analysis Definition NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
systems analyst NO IMPORT - insubstantial<br>
Systems Application Architecture NO IMPORT - irrelevant<br>
Systems Development Life Cycle DONE<br>
systems jock NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
Systems Network Architecture NO IMPORT - irrelevant<br>
system software NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
systems operator NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
systems programmer NO IMPORT - irrelevant<br>
systems programming NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
system unit NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
System V NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
System V Interface Definition NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
systolic array DONE<br>
SysVile NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
sz NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>

</doc>
<doc id="11337" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11337" title="Wikipedia:Free On-line Dictionary of Computing/C - D">
Wikipedia:Free On-line Dictionary of Computing/C - D

C NO IMPORT (already exists)<br>
(c)<br>
C*<br>
C++ NO IMPORT (already exists)<br>
C+-<br>
C+@<br>
C-10<br>
C1 security<br>
c2man<br>
C2 security<br>
c386<br>
C5<br>
C64<br>
c68<br>
CA<br>
ca<br>
cable modem<br>
cache<br>
cache block<br>
cache coherency DONE<br>
cache conflict "redirect to cache coherency"<br>
cache consistency "redirect to cache coherency"<br>
cache hit "redirect to cache"<br>
cache line DONE<br> 
cache memory "redirect to cache"<br>
cache miss "redirect to cache"<br>
Cache On A STick "redirect to Cache on a stick"<br>
caching "redirect to cache"<br>
CACI<br>
CACM<br>
CAD<br>
CAD/CAM<br>
CADD<br>
Cadence Design Systems<br>
CADET<br>
CADRE<br>
CAE<br>
CAF<br>
CAFE<br>
CAGE<br>
CAI<br>
Cairo<br>
CAIS<br>
CAIS-A<br>
CAiSE<br>
CAJOLE<br>
CAL<br>
Calc<br>
calculator<br>
Calculus of Communicating Systems<br>
Calendar API<br>
Calendar Application Programming Interface<br>
Caliban<br>
Calico<br>
California State University San Marcos<br>
callback<br>
call-by-name<br>
call-by-need<br>
call-by-reference<br>
call-by-value<br>
call-by-value-result<br>
call/cc<br>
callee<br>
Caller ID<br>
calling convention<br>
Call-Level Interface<br>
Call Unix<br>
Callware<br>
call-with-current-continuation<br>
CALS<br>
CAM<br>
CAM-6<br>
CAMAL<br>
Cambridge Lisp<br>
Camelot Library<br>
camera ready<br>
CAMIL<br>
CAML<br>
Caml Light<br>
CAM-PC<br>
Campus Wide Information System<br>
CAN<br>
can<br>
Canada<br>
Cancel<br>
Cancelbunny<br>
Cancelm00se<br>
Cancelmoose<br>
Cancelpoodle<br>
candidate key<br>
Candle<br>
candygrammar<br>
canonical<br>
Canonical Encoding Rules<br>
canonical name<br>
canonicity<br>
C (ANSI)<br>
can't happen<br>
Cantor<br>
CAP<br>
Capabilities Maturity Model<br>
capability<br>
Capability Maturity Model<br>
capacitor<br>
capacity<br>
CAPI<br>
Cap'n Crunch<br>
Captain Abstraction<br>
Captain Crunch<br>
card<br>
Cardbox for Windows<br>
Cardbus<br>
cardinality<br>
cardinal number<br>
CARDS<br>
card walloper<br>
Career Limiting Move<br>
caret<br>
careware<br> DONE
cargo cult programming<br>
Caribou CodeWorks<br>
Carl Friedrich Gauss<br>
Carnegie Mellon University<br>
carpal tunnel syndrome<br>
Carriage Return<br>
Carrierless Amplitude/Phase Modulation<br>
carrier scanner<br>
carrier signal<br>
Cartesian coordinates<br>
Cartesian product<br>
CAS<br>
CAS 8051 Assembler<br>
cascade<br>
Cascading Style Sheets<br>
CASE<br>
case<br>
case and paste<br>
case based reasoning<br>
CASE Data Interchange Format<br>
CASE framework<br>
case insensitive<br>
Case Integration Services<br>
CASE*Method<br>
case sensitive<br>
case sensitivity<br>
CASE SOAP III<br>
case statement<br>
CASE tools<br>
cashe<br>
CAST<br>
cast<br>
casters-up mode<br>
casting the runes<br>
CAT<br>
cat<br>
Cat 3<br>
Cat 5<br>
catatonic<br>
CATE<br>
Categorical Abstract Machine Language<br>
category<br>
Category 3<br>
Category 5<br>
CA-Telon<br>
cathode ray tube<br>
CATIA<br>
cationic cocktail<br>
C/ATLAS<br>
CATNIP<br>
CATO<br>
Cauchy sequence<br>
cause-effect graphing<br>
CAV<br>
Cayenne Software<br>
CAYLEY<br>
cb<br>
CBASIC<br>
C-BC<br>
CBD<br>
C Beautifier<br>
CBIR<br>
CBN<br>
CBR<br>
CBT<br>
CBV<br>
cbw<br>
cc<br>
CC++<br>
C/C++<br>
CCalc<br>
CCD<br>
CCIRN<br>
CCITT<br>
CCITT HIgh-Level Language<br>
CCL<br>
CCLU<br>
ccmail<br>
cc:mail<br>
CCP<br>
CCR<br>
CCS<br>
CCSP<br>
CCTA<br>
CD<br>
cd<br>
CDA<br>
CDC<br>
CDDI<br>
CDD/Plus<br>
CDE<br>
CDF "redirect to" Common Data Format<br>
CD-i<br>
CDIF<br>
CDL<br>
CDM<br>
CDMA<br>
CDP1802<br>
CDPD<br>
cdr<br>
CD-R<br>
CD-Read-Write<br>
CD-Rewritable<br>
CD-ROM<br>
CD-ROM drive<br>
CD-RW<br>
CDS<br>
cd tilde<br>
CE<br>
Cecil<br>
Cedar<br>
CEEMAC+<br>
CEI-PACT<br>
Celeron<br>
CELIP<br>
cell<br>
Cellang<br>
CELLAS<br>
Cello<br>
CELLSIM<br>
Cellular<br>
cellular automata<br>
cellular automaton<br>
Cellular Digital Packet Data<br>
cellular multiprocessing<br>
Cellular Neural Network<br>
CELP<br>
CEN<br>
CENELEC<br>
Centi-Call Second<br>
central office<br>
Central office exchange service<br>
central processing unit<br>
Centrex<br>
Centronics<br>
Centrum voor Wiskunde en Informatica<br>
century meltdown<br>
cepstra<br>
cepstrum<br>
CEPT<br>
CER<br>
Ceramic Pin Grid Array<br>
Ceres workstation Oberon System<br>
Cerf, Vint<br>
CERN<br>
CERNLIB<br>
CERT<br>
Certificate Authority<br>
CESP<br>
CESSL<br>
cextract<br>
cf<br>
CFD<br>
CFML<br>
cforth<br>
cfortran.h<br>
CFP<br>
CFP92<br>
cg<br>
CGA<br>
CGGL<br>
CGI<br>
cgi-bin<br>
CGI Joe<br>
CGI program<br>
CGI script<br>
CGM<br>
CGOL<br>
cgram<br>
ch<br>
chad<br>
chad box<br>
Chadless keypunch<br>
chain<br>
Challenge-Handshake Authentication Protocol<br>
Chalmers University of Technology<br>
change management<br>
channel<br>
channel hopping<br>
channel op<br>
channel service unit<br>
channel service unit/data service unit<br>
chan op<br>
chaos<br>
CHAP<br>
char<br>
character<br>
character encoding<br>
character encoding scheme<br>
character graphics<br>
characteristic function<br>
character repertoire<br>
character set<br>
character set identifier<br>
Charge-Coupled Device<br>
CHARITY<br>
charityware<br>
Charles Babbage<br>
Charles Simonyi<br>
CHARM<br>
CHARM++<br>
Charme<br>
CHARYBDIS<br>
chase pointers<br>
CHASM<br>
chat<br>
chatbot<br>
chat room<br>
chatterbot<br>
cheapernet<br>
checkdigit<br>
Checkout Test language<br>
checkpoint<br>
checksum<br>
chemist<br>
Chen<br>
CHEOPS<br>
Chernobyl packet<br>
chess<br>
CHI<br>
Chicago<br>
chicken head<br>
chicklet keyboard DONE<br>
chiclet keyboard DONE<br>
child<br>
child process DONE<br>
child record<br>
child version<br>
CHILI<br>
CHILL<br>
Chimera<br>
chine nual<br>
Chinese Army technique<br>
CHIP<br>
chip<br>
CHIP-48<br>
CHIP-8<br>
chip box<br>
Chip Jewelry<br>
Chip Scale Packaging<br>
chip set<br>
Chips &amp<br> Technologies<br>
CHISEL<br>
chmod<br>
CHOCS<br>
choke<br>
chomp<br>
CHOP<br>
Chop<br>
Chorus<br>
Christmas tree<br>
Christmas tree packet<br>
Christopher Strachey<br>
chromatic number<br>
chrome<br>
chroot<br>
CHRP<br>
chug<br>
chunker<br>
Church, Alonzo<br>
Church integer<br>
Church of the SubGenius<br>
Church-Rosser Theorem<br>
ci<br>
CI$<br>
CICERO<br>
CICS<br>
CID<br>
CIDR<br>
CIEL<br>
CIF<br>
CIFS<br>
Cigale<br>
CIL<br>
CIM<br>
CIMS PL/I<br>
Cinderella Book<br>
CINT92<br>
C-Interp<br>
ciphertext<br>
CIP-L<br>
CIR<br>
CIRCAL<br>
circuit<br>
CIRcuit CALculus<br>
circuit switched<br>
circuit switching<br>
circular buffer<br>
Cirrus Logic<br>
CIS<br>
CISC<br>
Cisco Systems, Inc.<br>
CISI<br>
CITRAN<br>
CityScape<br>
CIX<br> NO IMPORT written in 1994
CJK<br>
CJKV<br>
ck<br>
CL<br>
cl<br>
CLAM<br>
C Language Integrated Production System<br>
Clarify<br>
Clarion<br>
Claris<br>
CLASP<br>
class<br>
class hierarchy<br>
classic<br>
Classic-Ada<br>
classical logic<br>
Classic C<br>
Classless Inter-Domain Routing<br>
class library<br>
class method<br>
Class Oriented Ring Associated Language<br>
Class-Relation Method<br>
Clean NO IMPORT (already exists)<br>
clean<br>
Cleanroom<br>
CLEAR<br>
clear box testing<br>
CLEO<br>
CLHEP<br>
CLI<br>
CLiCC<br>
click<br>
client<br>
client-server<br>
client/server<br>
client-server model<br>
Client To Client Protocol<br>
C++Linda<br>
C-Linda<br>
CLIP<br>
CLiP<br>
clipboard<br>
Clipper<br>
CLIPS<br>
clique<br>
CLISP<br>
Clive Sinclair<br>
CLIX<br>
CLM<br>
CLNP<br>
clobber<br>
clock<br>
clock rate - DONE<br>
clock speed<br>
clone<br>
clone-and-hack coding<br>
clonebot<br>
CLOS<br>
closed-box testing<br>
closed set<br>
closed term<br>
Clos network<br>
closure<br>
closure conversion<br>
Clover<br>
clover key<br>
CLP<br>
CLP*<br>
CLP(R)<br>
CLP(sigma*)<br>
CLR<br>
CLtL1<br>
CLtL2<br>
CLU<br>
clu2c<br>
cluster<br>
Cluster 86<br>
clustergeeking<br>
clustering<br>
CLUT<br>
CLV<br>
CLX<br>
CM<br>
cm<br>
CMA<br>
CMAY<br>
CMC<br>
CMIP<br>
CMIS<br>
CML<br>
CMM<br>
CMOS<br>
CMP<br>
CMS<br>
CMS-2<br>
CMU<br>
CMU CL<br>
CMU Common Lisp<br>
CMVC<br>
CMYK<br>
CMZ<br>
cn<br>
CNAME<br>
CNC<br>
CNET<br>
CNI<br>
CNN<br>
CNRI<br>
co<br>
CO2<br>
Coad/Yourdon<br>
COALA<br>
coalesced sum<br>
Coalition for Networked Information<br>
coarse grain<br>
COAST<br>
coax<br>
coaxial cable<br>
COBOL<br>
COBOL-1961 Extended<br>
COBOL fingers<br>
COBRA<br>
cobweb site<br>
Cocktail<br>
cocktail shaker sort<br>
CoCo<br>
Cocol<br>
Coco Language<br>
Cocol/R<br>
COCOMO<br>
Coco/R<br>
CODASYL<br>
Codd's First Normal Form<br>
Codd's reduction algorithm<br>
code<br>
Code 2.0<br>
codebook<br>
CODEC<br>
CodeCenter<br>
coded character set<br>
Code Division Multiple Access -- DONE<br>
code division multiplexing<br>
code grinder<br>
code management<br>
code police<br>
code position<br>
coder/decoder<br>
codes<br>
C-odeScript<br>
code segment<br>
code walk<br>
codewalker<br>
CODIL<br>
codomain<br>
coefficient of X<br>
coercion<br>
COFF<br>
COGENT<br>
Cogent Prolog<br>
Cognitech<br>
cognitive architecture<br>
COGO<br>
Coherent Parallel C<br>
COHESION<br>
COIF<br>
cokebottle<br>
COLASL<br>
COLD<br>
cold boot<br>
ColdFusion<br>
ColdFusion Markup Language<br>
COLD-K<br>
COLINGO<br>
collision<br>
collision detection<br>
collocation<br>
co-location<br>
colon<br>
color<br>
Color Graphics Adapter<br>
color model<br>
Colossus<br>
colour<br>
colour depth<br>
colour look-up table<br>
colour model<br>
colour palette<br>
Columbia AppleTalk Package<br>
Column Address Strobe<br>
COM<br>
com<br>
COMAL<br>
combination<br>
combinator<br>
combinatory logic<br>
Comdex<br>
COME FROM<br>
COMIS<br>
COMIT<br>
Comite Europeen des Postes et Telecommunications<br>
COMIT II<br>
Comma<br>
comma<br>
command<br>
command interpreter<br>
command key<br>
command line interface<br>
command line interpreter<br>
command line option<br>
comma separated values<br>
COMMEN<br>
comment<br>
comment out<br>
commercial at<br>
Commercial Internet eXchange<br>
Commercial Translator<br>
comm mode<br>
Commodore 1010<br>
Commodore 128<br>
Commodore 1541 -- DONE<br>
Commodore 1570<br>
Commodore 1571<br>
Commodore 1581 -- DONE<br>
Commodore 64<br>
Commodore 64DX<br>
Commodore 65<br>
Commodore Business Machines DONE (Commodore International)<br>
Commodore SX64<br>
COMmon Algorithmic Language<br>
Common Applications Environment<br>
Common Applications Service Element<br>
Common Architecture for Next Generation Internet Protocol<br>
COmmon Business Oriented Language<br>
common carrier<br>
Common Command Set<br>
Common Communication Services<br>
Common Desktop Environment<br>
Common ESP<br>
Common Gateway Interface<br>
Common Hardware Reference Platform<br>
Common Intermediate Format<br>
Common Intermediate Language<br>
Common Internet File System<br>
Common-ISDN-API<br>
Common ISDN Application Programming Interface<br>
Common Lisp<br>
Common LISP in Parallel<br>
Common LISP Object System<br>
CommonLoops<br>
Common Management Information Protocol<br>
Common Management Information Services<br>
Common Object File Format<br>
Common Object Model<br>
Common Object Request Broker Architecture<br>
Common Objects<br>
Common Program Interface<br>
Common User Access<br>
Commonwealth Hackish<br>
Communicating Functional Processes<br>
Communicating Sequential Processes<br>
Communications Decency Act<br>
Communications of the ACM<br>
communications port<br>
Communications Server<br>
communications software<br>
communication system<br>
COMNET<br>
compact<br>
Compact COBOL<br>
Compact Disc<br>
Compact Disc interactive<br>
Compact Disc Read-Only Memory<br>
Compact Disc Read-Write<br>
Compact Disc Recordable<br>
Compact Disc Rewritable<br>
compaction<br>
compactness preserving<br>
Compaq Computer Corporation<br>
Compas Pascal<br>
COMPASS<br>
compatibility<br>
compatible<br>
Compatible Timesharing System<br>
Compel<br>
Competitive Access Provider<br>
compiler<br>
compiler compiler<br>
Compiler-Compiler<br>
compiler-compiler<br>
compiler jock<br>
Compiler Language for Information Processing<br>
Compiler Target Language<br>
COMPL<br>
complement<br>
Complementary Metal Oxide Semiconductor<br>
complementary nondeterministic polynomial<br>
complete<br>
complete graph<br>
complete inference system<br>
complete lattice<br>
complete metric space<br>
completeness<br>
complete partial ordering<br>
complete theory<br>
complete unification<br>
Complex Instruction Set Computer<br>
complexity<br>
complexity analysis<br>
complexity class<br>
complexity measure<br>
complex number<br>
complex programmable logic device<br>
component<br>
component architecture<br>
component based development<br>
Component Integration Laboratories<br>
Component Object Model<br>
com port<br>
composite<br>
composition<br>
Compositional C++<br>
Compound Document Architecture<br>
compound key<br>
COMPREHENSIVE<br>
Comprehensive Perl Archive Network<br>
Comprehensive TeX Archive Network<br>
compress<br>
Compressed SLIP<br>
compressed video<br>
compression<br>
COMPROSL<br>
Compu$erve<br>
Compulink Information eXchange<br>
CompuServe Corporation<br>
CompuServe Information Service<br>
Compusult Ltd.<br>
computability theory<br>
computable<br>
Computational Adequacy Theorem<br>
computational complexity<br>
computational geometry<br>
computational learning<br>
COMpute ParallEL<br>
Computer<br>
computer<br>
Computer Aided Design<br>
Computer Aided Engineering<br>
Computer-Aided Instruction<br>
Computer-Aided Learning<br>
Computer Aided Software Engineering<br>
Computer-Aided Software Testing<br>
Computer Animation Movie Language<br>
Computer-Assisted Learning<br>
Computer-Assisted Software Engineering<br>
Computer Associates<br>
Computer-Based Training<br>
Computer Compiler<br>
computer confetti<br>
Computer Conservation Society<br>
computer crime<br>
Computer Design Language<br>
computer dictionary<br>
Computer Emergency Response Team<br>
computer ethics<br>
computer geek<br>
computer-generated imagery<br>
Computer Generation Incorporated<br>
Computer Graphics Metafile<br>
computer language<br>
computer law<br>
computer literacy<br>
Computer Mediated Communication<br>
computer nerd<br>
computer network<br>
Computer Output to Laser Disk<br>
Computer Professionals for Social Responsibility<br>
computer program<br>
Computer + Science NETwork<br>
computer security<br>
computer sex<br>
Computer Software Configuration Item<br>
Computer Supported Cooperative Work<br>
Computer Telephone Integration<br>
Computer Telephony Integration<br>
computer virus<br>
computer vision<br>
compute server<br>
computing<br>
Computing Devices Canada Ltd.<br>
computing dictionary<br>
computron<br>
Compuware Corporation<br>
COMSL<br>
COMTRAN<br>
con<br>
ConC<br>
concatenate<br>
concatenated key<br>
concentrator<br>
conceptualisation<br>
Concert/C<br>
ConCoord<br>
concrete class<br>
Concrete Data Structure<br>
concrete syntax<br>
CONCUR<br>
concurrency<br>
Concurrent C<br>
Concurrent C++<br>
Concurrent Clean NO IMPORT (already exists)<br>
Concurrent CLU<br>
Concurrent Euclid<br>
Concurrent LISP<br>
Concurrent Massey Hope<br>
Concurrent ML<br>
Concurrent Oberon<br>
Concurrent Object-Oriented C<br>
Concurrent Object-Oriented Language<br>
Concurrent Pascal<br>
Concurrent Prolog<br>
Concurrent Scheme<br>
ConcurrentSmalltalk<br>
Concurrent SP/k<br>
condela<br>
condition out<br>
condom<br>
Conference On DAta SYstems Languages<br>
Conferencing over IP<br>
confidence test<br>
CONFIG.SYS<br>
configuration item<br>
configuration management<br>
configuration programming<br>
conflation<br>
ConflictNet<br>
congestion<br>
CONIC<br>
logical conjunction<br>
Conjunctive Normal Form<br>
connect<br>
connected graph<br>
connected subgraph<br>
connectionless protocol<br>
Connection Machine LISP<br>
connection-oriented<br>
connection-oriented network service<br>
connective<br>
connector conspiracy<br>
CONNIVER<br>
Co-NP<br>
CONS<br>
cons<br>
conservative evaluation<br>
considered harmful<br>
consistently complete<br>
console<br>
console jockey<br>
Consortium for Lexical Research<br>
constant angular velocity<br>
constant applicative form<br>
constant folding<br>
Constantine/Yourdon<br>
constant linear velocity<br>
constant mapping<br>
constraint<br>
constraint functional programming<br>
Constraint Handling In Prolog<br>
ConstraintLisp<br>
Constraint Logic Programming<br>
CONSTRAINTS<br>
constraint satisfaction<br>
constructed type<br>
constructive<br>
Constructive Cost Model<br>
constructive solid geometry<br>
constructor<br>
Consul<br>
container class<br>
content addressable memory<br>
content-based information retrieval<br>
Content Data Model<br>
content-free<br>
contention slot<br>
context<br>
context clash<br>
context-free<br>
context-sensitive menu<br>
context switch<br>
Contextually Communicating Sequential Processes<br>
continental drift<br>
continuation<br>
Continuation Passing Style<br>
continuation passing style<br>
continuations<br>
continuous function<br>
Continuous System Modeling Program<br>
continuous wave<br>
contraction<br>
control<br>
Control and Status Register<br>
control-C<br>
control code<br>
control flow NO IMPORT (more detailed article) Control flow<br>
control-G<br>
Control Language<br>
controller<br>
control-O<br>
Control Program<br>
Control Program for Microcomputers<br>
control-Q<br>
control-S<br>
control structure NO IMPORT (more detailed article) Control flow<br>
control tty<br>
control unit<br>
conventional memory<br>
Convergent Technologies<br>
Convergent Technologies Operating System<br>
Conversational LISP<br>
Conversational Monitor System<br>
converse<br>
conversion to iteration<br>
CONVERT<br>
convert.f90<br>
Convex Computer Corporation<br>
convex hull<br>
Conway, John Horton<br>
Conway's Law<br>
Conway's Life<br>
cooC<br>
cooccurrence matrix<br>
cookbook<br>
cooked mode<br>
cookie<br>
cookie bear<br>
cookie file<br>
cookie jar<br>
cookie monster<br>
cooky<br>
COOL<br>
CooL<br>
COOL:Gen<br>
Co-operative Development Environment<br>
Cooperative Information System<br>
cooperative multitasking<br>
coordinate<br>
Coordinated Universal Time<br>
Coordinating Committee for Intercontinental Research Networks<br>
copious free time<br>
copper<br>
Copper Distributed Data Interface<br>
coprocessor<br>
copy and paste<br>
copybook<br>
copybroke<br>
copying garbage collection<br>
copyleft<br>
copy member<br>
copy module<br>
copy protection<br>
copyright<br>
copywronged<br>
CORAL<br>
CORAL 66<br>
CORBA<br>
CORBIE<br>
CORC<br>
core<br>
core cancer<br>
core dump<br>
core gateway<br>
Corel Corporation<br>
core leak<br>
Corel VENTURA<br>
Core War<br>
corge<br>
Cornell List Processor<br>
Cornell Theory Center<br>
Cornell University<br>
Coroutine Pascal<br>
Corporation for Open Systems<br>
Corporation for Research and Educational Networking<br>
CORREGATE<br>
Correlatives and Conversions<br>
Cortex<br>
CORTL<br>
COS<br>
COSE<br>
COSINE<br>
cosmic rays<br>
COSS<br>
Cost Driver Attribute<br>
Cost/Schedule Control System Criteria<br>
COTS<br>
Cougar<br>
cough and die<br>
countable<br>
countably many<br>
counted<br>
country code<br>
coupling<br>
Course Author Language<br>
courseware<br>
Coursewriter III<br>
cowboy<br>
COWSEL<br>
CP<br>
CPAN<br>
CParaOps5<br>
CPE<br>
CPGA<br>
CPI<br>
CPL<br>
CPLD<br>
CPM DONE (same as below)<br>
CP/M DONE<br>
cpo<br>
cpp<br>
cppp<br>
C Programmer's Disease<br>
C-Prolog<br>
cproto<br>
CPS<br>
CPSR<br>
CPU<br>
CPU Info Center<br>
CPU time<br>
CPU Wars<br>
CR<br>
cr<br>
cracker<br>
cracking<br>
crack root<br>
crank<br>
crapplet<br>
CrApTeX<br>
crash<br>
crash and burn<br>
crawler<br>
crawling horror<br>
Cray instability<br>
crayola<br>
crayola books<br>
crayon<br>
Cray Research, Inc.<br>
CRC<br>
creationism<br>
creeping elegance<br>
creeping featurism<br>
creeping featuritis<br>
C-Refine<br>
CREN<br>
CREW PRAM<br>
crippleware<br>
criptography<br>
Crisis Software<br>
CRISP<br>
crisp<br>
Crispy Critters<br>
critical mass<br>
critical section<br>
CRL<br>
CRLF<br>
CRM<br>
crock<br>
cron<br>
cross-assembler<br>
cross-compiler<br>
cross-platform<br>
cross-post<br>
cross software<br>
CROSSTABS<br>
crosstalk<br>
CROW PRAM<br>
CRT<br>
crudware<br>
cruft<br>
cruftsmanship<br>
cruft together<br>
crufty<br>
crumb<br>
crunch<br>
cruncha cruncha cruncha<br>
crunchy<br>
cryppie<br>
crypt<br>
cryptanalysis<br>
Crypt Breakers Workbench<br>
cryptography<br>
cryptology<br>
Crystal<br>
CS-4<br>
C-Scheme<br>
CSCI<br>
C/SCSC<br>
CSCW<br>
CSG<br>
CSG-tree<br>
csh<br>
C shell<br>
.cshrc<br>
CSID<br>
C++SIM<br>
CSK Software<br>
CSL<br>
CSLIP<br>
CSM<br>
CSMA/CD<br>
CSMP<br>
CSNET<br>
CSO<br>
CSP<br>
CSP/80<br>
CS/PCode<br>
CSP/k<br>
CS-Prolog<br>
CSPS<br>
CSP-S<br>
CS/QCode<br>
CSR<br>
CSS<br>
CSSA<br>
CSS/II<br>
CSSL<br>
CSTools<br>
CSU<br>
CSU/DSU<br>
CSV<br>
CTC<br>
CTCP<br>
CTI<br>
CTL<br>
CTOS<br>
ctrl<br>
CTS<br>
CTSS<br>
CTY<br>
CU<br>
cu<br>
CUA (CUA - Common User Application)<br>
Cube<br>
cube<br>
cubing<br>
CUCH<br>
Cuckoo's Egg<br>
CUL<br>
Culler-Fried System<br>
CUPID<br>
CUPL<br>
curly bracket<br>
current<br>
curried function NO IMPORT (already exists)<br>
currying NO IMPORT (Already exists)<br>
curseperl<br>
curses<br>
cursor<br>
cursor dipped in X<br>
CU-SeeMe<br>
CUSI<br>
cuspy<br>
Customer Information Control System<br>
Customer Information Systems<br>
Customer Interaction Software<br>
Customer Relationship Management<br>
CUT<br>
cut and paste<br>
cut a tape<br>
cutover<br>
cv<br>
CVS<br>
CW<br>
CWeb<br>
CWI<br>
CWIC<br>
CWIS<br>
C with Classes<br>
cx<br>
cxref<br>
cy<br>
Cy486SLC<br>
cyber<br>
cyberbunny<br>
cyberchondriac<br>
cybercrud<br>
CyberGlove<br>
cybernetics<br>
cyberpunk<br>
cyberrhea<br>
cybersex<br>
cyberspace<br>
cyberspastic<br>
cyber-squatting<br>
CyberWand<br>
CyberZine<br>
CYBIL<br>
Cyc<br>
CYCL<br>
cycle<br>
cyclebabble<br>
cycle crunch<br>
cycle drought<br>
cycle of reincarnation<br>
cycle server<br>
cyclic redundancy check<br>
cyclic redundancy code<br>
Cyclo<br>
cyclomatic complexity<br>
Cygnus Tcl Tools<br>
cylinder<br>
CypherText<br>
Cyrix<br>
Cyrix 6x86 -- DONE<br>
cz<br>
D<br>
DAA<br>
DAC<br>
DACAPO<br>
DACNOS<br>
D/A converter<br>
DACTL<br>
DADS<br>
daemon<br>
DAG<br>
Daisy<br>
DAISY 201<br>
daisy chain DONE<br>
daisywheel printer<br>
dangling pointer<br>
DANTE<br>
DAP Fortran<br>
DAPLEX<br>
DARE<br>
dark-side hacker<br>
Darms<br>
DARPA<br>
Dartmouth BASIC<br>
Darwin kernel<br>
DAS<br>
DASD<br>
DASE<br>
DASL<br>
DAT<br>
data<br>
data abstraction<br>
Data Address Generator<br>
database<br>
database administrator<br>
database machine DONE<br>
database management system<br>
database manager<br>
database normalisation -- DONE (renamed database normalization)<br>
database query language<br>
database server<br>
Data/BASIC<br>
DATABUS<br>
data bus<br>
data channel<br>
DATACODE I<br>
Datacom<br>
Data Communication Equipment<br>
Data Communications Equipment<br>
data compression<br>
Data definition language<br>
data dictionary<br>
data dictionary file<br>
data driven<br>
Data Driven Machine<br>
Data Encryption Algorithm<br>
Data Encryption Key<br>
Data Encryption Standard<br>
data flow<br>
data flow analysis<br>
Data Flow Diagram<br>
data fork<br>
data frame<br>
Data General DONE<br>
Data General mN601<br>
data glove<br>
datagram<br>
data hierarchy<br>
Data Interchange Standards Association<br>
Data Jack<br>
Datakit<br>
Data Link Connection Identifier<br>
data link layer<br>
data link level<br>
Data Link Provider Interface<br>
Data Management Language<br>
Data Manipulation Language<br>
data mart<br>
Datamation<br>
data mining<br>
data model<br>
data modeling<br>
data modelling<br>
Data Over Cable Systems Interface Specifications<br>
data packet<br>
Dataparallel-C<br>
Data Parallel Haskell<br>
data path<br>
Dataphone Digital Service<br>
data processing<br>
data rate<br>
data set<br>
data set organization<br>
Datastorm Technologies, Inc.
data striping<br>
Data Structures Language<br>
Data Terminal Equipment<br>
Data Terminal Ready<br>
DATA-TEXT<br>
data transfer rate<br>
DATATRIEVE<br>
data type<br>
DataViews<br>
DataVis<br>
data warehouse<br>
data warehousing<br>
date<br>
DAU<br>
daughter<br>
David Turner<br>
day mode<br>
DAZIX<br>
DB<br>
DB2<br>
DB-25<br>
DBA<br>
dBASE<br>
DBC<br>
DBCS<br>
dBFAST<br>
DBH<br>
DBMS<br>
DBPL<br>
DBRI<br>
dBXL<br>
DC<br>
DC1<br>
DC2<br>
DC3<br>
DC4<br>
DCA<br>
DCALGOL<br>
DCC<br>
DCDL<br>
DCE<br>
DCG<br>
DCI<br>
DCL<br>
DCOM<br>
DCP<br>
D. C. Power Lab<br>
DCS<br>
DCT<br>
DD<br>
dd<br>
DDB<br>
DDCMP<br>
DDE<br>
DDE Manager<br>
DDIF<br>
DDL<br>
DDM<br>
DDN<br>
DDO<br>
DDP<br>
DDR-RAM<br>
DDR-SDRAM<br>
DDS<br>
DDT<br>
de<br>
DE-9<br>
DEA<br>
DEACON<br>
dead<br>
DEADBEEF DONE (included in Magic debug values)<br>
dead code<br>
deadlock<br>
deadly embrace<br>
dead tree<br>
dead tree edition<br>
deamon<br>
death code<br>
Death Star<br>
deb<br>
Debian<br>
Debian GNU/Linux<br>
debianize<br>
deboursification<br>
De Bruijn graph<br>
De Bruijn notation<br>
debugging<br>
DEC<br>
dec<br>
DEC Alpha<br>
decay<br>
DECdesign<br>
DECdns<br>
DEChead<br>
dechunker<br>
decidability<br>
decidable<br>
decimal point<br>
decision problem<br>
decision support<br>
decision support database<br>
Decision Support Systems<br>
decision theory<br>
deckle<br>
declarative language<br>
DECmate<br>
DECnet<br>
Decomposed Petri Net<br>
decompress<br>
decryption<br>
DECstation<br>
DECT<br>
DECtape<br>
DECUS<br>
Decus cpp<br>
DEC Wars<br>
DECwindows<br>
DECwrite<br>
DED<br>
dedicated line<br>
deductive database<br>
deductive tableau<br>
Deep Blue<br>
deep hack mode<br>
deep magic<br>
deep space<br>
de facto standard<br>
default route<br>
defect<br>
defect analysis<br>
defect density<br>
defenestration<br>
Defense Advanced Research Project Agency<br>
Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency<br>
Defense Communications Agency<br>
Defense Data Network<br>
Defense Data Network Network Information Center<br>
Defense Information Systems Agency<br>
Defense Trade Regulations<br>
deferral<br>
definite clause<br>
definite sentence<br>
definitional constraint programming<br>
deflate<br>
deflate compression<br>
deflate/inflate compression<br>
deforestation<br>
defrag<br>
defragment<br>
defunct process<br>
degree<br>
degrees of freedom<br>
dehose<br>
DEK<br>
Delaunay triangulation<br>
delayed control-transfer<br>
delay instruction<br>
delay slot<br>
delete<br>
delimiter<br>
delint<br>
Delirium<br>
Delivered Source Instruction<br>
Dell Computer Corporation<br>
Delphi<br>
Delphi Technique<br>
Delta<br>
delta<br>
Delta-4<br>
delta conversion<br>
Delta-Prolog<br>
delta reduction<br>
DELTASE<br>
demand driven<br>
demand paged<br>
demand paging<br>
DeMarco<br>
DeMarco/Yourdon<br>
demented<br>
Demeter<br>
demigod<br>
De-Militarised Zone<br>
demo<br>
demodulate<br>
demodulation<br>
demo mode<br>
demon<br>
Demon Internet Ltd.<br> NO IMPORT article from 1994
DeMorgan's theorem<br>
demo version<br>
Denis Howe<br>
Dennis Ritchie<br>
denotational semantics<br>
Denotational Semantics Language<br>
Department of Defense<br>
Department of Defense Network<br>
depeditate<br>
dependability<br>
dependable software<br>
deprecated<br>
depth-first search<br>
DER<br>
dereference<br>
de-rezz<br>
derived class<br>
derived type<br>
DES<br>
descender<br>
descent function<br>
Descriptive Top-Level Specification<br>
descriptor<br>
design<br>
Design In Real Time<br>
design pattern<br>
design recovery<br>
Design System language<br>
desk check<br>
desktop database<br>
Desktop Management Interface<br>
Desktop Management Task Force -- DONE<br>
desktop manager<br>
desktop publishing<br>
DESQview<br>
destructor<br>
DESY<br>
DETAB<br>
deterministic<br>
deterministic automaton<br>
DETOL<br>
developer<br>
development<br>
Developmental Test and Evaluation<br>
development environment<br>
device<br>
Device Control<br>
Device Control 1<br>
Device Control 2<br>
Device Control 3<br>
Device Control 4<br>
device driver<br>
device independent bitmap<br>
Devil Book<br>
dev/null<br>
devo<br>
DEX<br>
DFA<br>
DFC<br>
DFD<br>
DFS<br>
DFT<br>
DGL<br>
DG/L<br>
DHCP<br>
Dhrystone<br>
DHSD<br>
DHTML<br>
DIALOG<br>
dialup<br>
DIAMAG<br>
diameter<br>
Diamond<br>
DIANA<br>
DIB<br>
DIBOL<br>
dickless workstation<br>
Dick Size War<br>
DICOM<br>
Dictionary APL<br>
dictionary flame<br>
Dictionary of Algorithms and Data Structures<br>
Dictionary of Computing<br>
DID<br>
diddle<br>
die<br>
die horribly<br>
diff<br>
Difference Engine<br>
difference equation<br>
differential<br>
differential driver<br>
differential line<br>
Diffie-Hellman<br>
digerati<br>
digest<br>
Digex<br>
DigiCash<br>
Digicom<br>
digirati<br>
digit<br>
Digital<br>
digital<br>
digital audio<br>
Digital Audio Tape<br>
digital camera<br>
digital carrier<br>
digital dashboard<br>
Digital Data Service<br>
Digital Enhanced Cordless Telecommunications<br>
digital envelope<br>
Digital Equipment Computer Users Society<br>
Digital Equipment Corporation DONE<br>
Digital Equipment Corporation Network DONE, as DECnet<br>
Digital European Cordless Telecommunications<br>
Digital Express Group, Inc.<br>
Digital Lempel Ziv 1<br>
Digital Library Initiative<br>
Digital Linear Tape<br>
Digital Multimeter<br>
Digital Research DONE<br>
digital service unit<br>
Digital Signal Processing DONE<br>
Digital Signal Processing Language<br>
digital signature<br>
digital signatures<br>
Digital Signature Standard<br>
Digital Simulation Language<br>
Digital Simultaneous Voice and Data<br>
DIGITAL Standard MUMPS<br>
Digital Subscriber Line<br>
Digital Subscriber Line Access Module<br>
Digital Subscriber Loop<br>
Digital Switched Network<br>
Digital to Analog Converter<br>
Digital Versatile Disc<br>
Digital Video Disc<br>
Dijkstra's guarded command language<br>
dike<br>
DIL<br>
Dilbert<br>
Dilberted<br>
DIM<br>
DIMATE<br>
DIMM<br>
DIM statement<br>
DIN<br>
DIN-8<br>
ding<br>
Dining Philosophers Problem<br>
dink<br>
DinnerBell<br>
DINO<br>
dinosaur<br>
dinosaur pen<br>
dinosaurs mating<br>
diode<br>
Diophantine equation<br>
DIP<br>
diplex<br>
Direct-Access Storage Device<br>
Direct Client to Client Protocol<br>
Direct Connection<br>
directed acyclic graph<br>
directed graph<br>
Directed Oc<br>
directed set<br>
Direct Inward Dialing<br>
directional coupler<br>
Directly Executable Test Oriented Language<br>
direct mapped cache<br>
Direct Memory Access<br>
directory<br>
Directory Access Protocol<br>
directory service<br>
Directory System Agent<br>
Directory User Agent<br>
DirectX<br>
Dirt<br>
dirtball<br>
dirty power<br>
DISA<br>
disc<br>
disc drive<br>
disclaimer<br>
disconnect<br>
Discordianism<br>
discrete cosine transform<br>
discrete Fourier transform<br>
discrete preorder<br>
discriminated union<br>
discussion group<br>
Disiple<br>
disjoint union<br>
Disjunctive Normal Form<br>
disk<br>
disk controller - DONE<br>
disk drive<br>
disk duplexing<br>
diskette<br>
disk farm<br>
diskless workstation<br>
disk mirroring<br>
Disk Operating System<br>
disk operating system<br>
disk striping<br>
Dislang<br>
display<br>
display hack<br>
Display PostScript DONE<br>
display standard<br>
display standards<br>
display terminal<br>
Dissociated Press<br>
distfix<br>
Distributed Component Object Model<br>
Distributed Computing Environment<br>
distributed database<br>
Distributed Data Management<br>
Distributed Eiffel<br>
Distributed Logic Programming<br>
Distributed Management Environment<br>
distributed memory<br>
Distributed Network Operating System<br>
Distributed Operating Multi Access Interactive Network<br>
Distributed Processes<br>
Distributed Queue Dual Bus<br>
Distributed Smalltalk<br>
distributed system<br>
distributed systems<br>
distribution<br>
distributive lattice<br>
disusered<br>
dithering DONE<br>
Ditto Drive<br>
diverge<br>
divisor<br>
DJ<br>
DJGPP<br>
DjVu<br>
DK<br>
dk<br>
DL/1<br>
DLC<br>
DLCI<br>
DLE<br>
DLG<br>
DL/I<br>
DLL<br>
DLM<br>
DLP<br>
DLPI<br>
DLT<br>
DLUR/DLUS<br>
DLZ1<br>
dm<br>
DMA<br>
DMAD<br>
dmake<br>
DMALGOL<br>
DME<br>
DMI<br>
DML<br>
DMM<br>
DMTF -- DONE<br>
DMZ<br>
DNA computing<br>
DNF<br>
DNIS<br>
DNIX<br>
DNOS<br>
DNS<br>
do<br>
DOA<br>
Doc<br>
doc<br>
docking station<br>
DOCMaker<br>
doco<br>
DOCSIS<br>
document<br>
documentation<br>
Document Examiner<br>
Document Image Processing<br>
Document Object Model<br>
Document Style Semantics and Specification Language<br>
Document Type Definition<br>
DOCUS<br>
DoD<br>
DoD-1<br>
dodgy<br>
DOD-STD-2167A<br>
DoD-STD-2168<br>
DOE<br>
DOF<br>
dogcow<br>
dogpile<br>
dogwash<br>
DOL<br>
dollar<br>
do loop<br>
DOM<br>
domain<br>
domain address<br>
Domain Analysis<br>
domain architecture<br>
Domain Architecture Model<br>
domain calculus<br>
domain engineering<br>
domainist<br>
domain maturity<br>
domain model<br>
domain name<br>
Domain Name Server<br>
Domain Name System<br>
domain selection<br>
Domain Software Engineering Environment<br>
domain-specific language<br>
domain theory<br>
DOMF<br>
Donald Knuth<br>
dongle<br>
dongle-disk<br>
Don't do that then!<br>
donuts<br>
DOOM<br>
DOORS<br>
doorstop<br>
Dorito Syndrome<br>
DORUM<br>
DOS<br>
DOS/360 -- DONE<br>
DOS Protected Mode Interface<br>
DOS requester<br>
dot<br>
dot address<br>
dot file<br>
dot matrix printer<br>
dot notation<br>
dot pitch<br>
dotted quad<br>
double bucky<br>
double-click<br>
Double Data Rate Random Access Memory<br>
Double Data Rate Synchronous Random Access Memory<br>
double DECkers<br>
double density<br>
doubled sig<br>
double-duplex<br>
double quote<br>
doubly linked list<br>
DOUGLAS<br>
Douglas Engelbart<br>
Doug Lenat<br>
DOW COMPILER<br>
down<br>
download<br>
downloading<br>
downsizing<br>
downstream<br>
down-time<br>
downward closed<br>
Downy cocktail<br>
DP<br>
DPB<br>
DPer<br>
dpi DONE<br>
DPL<br>
DPL-82<br>
DPLL<br>
DPMI<br>
DPMS<br>
DPN<br>
DPP<br>
d-Prolog<br>
DPS<br>
dpSather<br>
DPSK<br>
DQDB<br>
draco<br>
Draft Once ReUse Many<br>
drag and drop<br>
drag-n-drop<br>
DRAGON<br>
dragon<br>
Dragon Book<br>
DRAGOON<br>
drain<br>
DRAM<br>
DRAM refresh<br>
Drawing eXchange Format<br>
dread high bit disease<br>
DRECNET<br>
driver<br>
drivers<br>
Dr. James H. Clark<br>
droid<br>
DROOL<br>
drool-proof paper<br>
drop cable<br>
drop-down list<br>
drop-down menu<br>
drop-ins<br>
drop on the floor<br>
drop-outs<br>
DrScheme<br>
DRUCO I<br>
drugged<br>
drum<br>
drunk mouse syndrome<br>
dry run<br>
DS0<br>
DS1<br>
DS1C<br>
DS2<br>
DS3<br>
DSA<br>
DSE<br>
DSEE<br>
D-shell connector<br>
DSI<br>
DSL<br>
DSLAM<br>
DS level<br>
DSM<br>
DSN<br>
DSP<br>
DSP32 Assembly Language<br>
DSP56000<br>
DSP56001<br>
dsp56165-gcc<br>
dsp56k-gcc<br>
DSP/C<br>
DSPL<br>
DSR<br>
DSS<br>
DSSSL<br>
DST<br>
DSU<br>
DSVD<br>
DSW<br>
DTALGOL<br>
DTD<br>
DTE<br>
DT&amp<br>E<br>
DTLS<br>
DTMF<br>
DTP<br>
DTR<br>
DTS<br>
DTSS<br>
D-type<br>
D-type flip-flop<br>
DUA<br>
dual<br>
DUAL-607<br>
dual-attached<br>
dual-homed<br>
Dual In-Line<br>
Dual In-line Memory Module<br>
Dual In-Line Package<br>
dual ported<br>
dual-stack<br>
Dual Tone Multi Frequency<br>
DUEL<br>
Duff's device<br>
dumbed down<br>
dumb terminal<br>
dump<br>
dumpster diving<br>
Dungeon<br>
dup killer<br>
duplex<br>
Duplex High Speed Data<br>
dup loop<br>
Durra<br>
dusty deck<br>
DV cartridge<br>
DVD<br>
DVD-R<br>
DVD-ROM<br>
DVI DONE (several versions)<br>
Dvorak<br>
Dwarf Storage Unit<br>
DWDM<br>
dweeb<br>
dwg<br>
DWIM<br>
DX4<br>
DXF<br>
dyadic<br>
DYANA<br>
Dylan<br>
Dylperl<br>
dynamic adaptive routing<br>
Dynamic Address Translation<br>
Dynamically Linked Library<br>
dynamically scoped<br>
dynamic analysis<br>
dynamic binding<br>
dynamic database management system<br>
Dynamic Data Exchange<br>
Dynamic Data Linking<br>
dynamic DBMS<br>
Dynamic Drive Overlay<br>
Dynamic Execution<br>
Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol<br>
Dynamic HTML<br>
DYnamic LANguage<br>
dynamic link<br>
dynamic link library<br>
Dynamic Object-Oriented Requirements System<br>
dynamic RAM<br>
dynamic random access memory<br>
dynamic routing<br>
DYnamics ANAlyzer<br>
dynamic scope<br>
dynamic scoping<br>
DYNAMO<br>
Dynix<br>
Dynix Automated Library Systems<br>
dynner<br>
DYSAC<br>
DYSTAL<br>
dz<br>

</doc>
<doc id="11338" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11338" title="Wikipedia:Free On-line Dictionary of Computing/T - W">
Wikipedia:Free On-line Dictionary of Computing/T - W

zzz,zzz
T1 DONE<br>
T1 line NO IMPORT<br>
T1 rate NO IMPORT<br>
T3 NO IMPORT <br>
T3 line NO IMPORT<br>
TA NO IMPORT - insignificant<br>
TAA NO IMPORT - insignificant<br>
TAB NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>
table NO IMPORT - insignificant<br>
table locking NO IMPORT - insignificant<br>zz
TABLET NO IMPORT - xf ,f,<br>
TABLOG NO IMPORT - esoter,Zic<br>
tab-separated values<br>
TABSOL NO IMP,ORT - xes CXoteric<br>
Tabulating Machine Company NO IMPORT - duplicate info<br>try 5. 
TAC NO IMPORT - esoteriKjc,c<br>
tagged queueing DONE<br>
tagged types NO IMPORT - insignificant<br>
tag name NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
tail circuit NO IMPORT - insignificant<br>
tail recursion DONE<br>
tail recursion modulo cons<br>
tail recursion optimisation<br>
tail-strict<br>
TAL DONE<br>
TALE NO IMPORT - esoteric<br>
Taligent DONE<br>
talk<br>
talk bomb<br>
talker system<br>
CTALL<br>
tall card<br>
Tandem Application Language<br>
Tandem Computers<br>
Tandy DONE<br>
Tanenbaum, Andrew DONE<br>CRCtanked<br>
TANSTAAFL<br>
TAO<br>
TAOS<br>
TAP<br>
tap NO IMPORT<br>
tape NO IMPORT<br>
tape archive<br>
tape drive<br>
tape head<br>
Tape Operating System<br>
TAPI DONE<br>
tar DONE<br>
tar and feather<br>
tarball<br>
targa<br>
Targa Graphics Adaptor<br>
target<br>
Target-Machine Description Language<br>
TARTAN<br>
Task Control Block<br>
task scheduling<br>
TASM<br>
TASS<br>
taste NO IMPORT - jargon<br>
tautological probability<br>
tautological set<br>
tautology<br>
TAWK NO IMPORT - insignificant<br>
Taxis<br>
tayste<br>
taz<br>
TBF<br>
TBIL<br>
TBK<br>
Tbl<br>
tc<br>
T-carrier system DONE<br>
TCB<br>
TCGS<br>
TC/IX<br>
Tcl DONE<br>
Tcl Consortium<br>
tcl-debug<br>
Tcl-DP<br>
tclhttpd<br>
tclx<br>
TCM<br>
TCO<br>
Tcode<br>
TCOL<br>
TCOL.Ada<br>
TCP DONE<br>
TCPIP DONE <br>
TCP/IP DONE<br>
tcsh<br>
Tcsim<br>
TCVN 5773<br>
TCVN 6056<br>
td<br>
TDD<br>
TDF<br>
TDFL<br>
TDI<br>
TDM DONE<br>
TDMA DONE<br>
TDR<br>
Teamwork<br>
Technical/Office Protocol<br>
Technion<br>
technology NO IMPORT<br>
Technology Enabled Relationship Manager<br>
Technology of Object-Oriented Languages and Systems<br>
TechRef<br>
TECO DONE<br>
tee<br>
TEI<br>
telco<br>
TELCOMP<br>
Telecommunication Display Device<br>
Telecommunications Device for the Deaf<br>
Telecommunications Industry Association<br>
telecommuting<br>
teledildonics<br>
telematics<br>
TelEnet<br>
TELEPAC<br>
Telephone Application Program Interface DONE<br>
telephony DONE<br>
Telephony Application Programming Interface DONE<br>
Telerat<br>
Telescript<br>
Teletype DONE<br>
teletype DONE<br>
Teletype Corporation<br>
teletypewriter DONE<br>
TeleUSE<br>
television DONE<br>
Television Interface Adaptor<br>
TELNET DONE<br>
Telocator Alphanumeric Protocol<br>
Telon<br>
TELOS<br>
TELSIM<br>
template code<br>
TEMPLOG<br>
TEMPO<br>
Tempo<br>
temporal database<br>
temporal logic<br>
Tempura<br>
Ten15<br>
tendinitis<br>
ten-finger interface<br>
tennis elbow<br>
tense<br>
tensor product DONE<br>
tenured graduate student<br>
tera- DONE<br>
terabyte DONE<br>
teraflop<br>
teraflop club<br>
TERM<br>
TERMAC<br>
termcap<br>
terminak<br>
terminal DONE<br>
Terminal Access Controller<br>
terminal adapter DONE<br>
Terminal Adaptor NO IMPORT<br>
terminal brain death<br>
terminal emulation NO IMPORT<br>
terminal emulator DONE<br>
terminal illness<br>
terminal junkie<br>
terminal node<br>
Terminal Oriented Social Science<br>
Terminal Productivity eXecutive<br>
terminal server<br>
Terminate and Stay Resident DONE<br>
termination analysis<br>
terminator<br>
term rewriting system<br>
Terms Of Service<br>
ternary DONE<br>
terpri<br>
terrabyte<br>
Terse<br>
test DONE<br>
Test coverage<br>
testing NO IMPORT<br>
TET<br>
TeX -- 'DONE'<br>
TeX-78<br>
TeX-82<br>
Texas Instruments DONE<br>
Texinfo<br>
text<br>
text-based<br>
text editor DONE<br>
Text Encoding Initiative<br>
text file<br>
Text Processing Utility<br>
Text Reckoning And Compiling<br>
text segment<br>
Text To Speech<br>
texture<br>
tf<br>
TFDL<br>
TFTP DONE<br>
tg<br>
TGA<br>
T-gen<br>
TGS-II<br>
TGS Systems<br>
tgz DONE<br>
th<br>
thanks in advance<br>
That's not a bug, that's a feature!<br>
T.H.E<br>
The Cuckoo's Egg<br>
The Force<br>
The Internet Account<br>
The MathWorks, Inc.<br>
The Metadata Company<br>
The Microsoft Network<br>
The Mythical Man-Month DONE<br>
The Network<br>
THEO<br>
theology<br>
theory<br>
theory change<br>
There's More Than One Way To Do It<br>
Theseus<br>
The story of Mel, a Real Programmer<br>
The World Of Cryton<br>
the X that can be Y is not the true X<br>
thicket<br>
thicknet DONE<br>
thin client DONE<br>
ThingLab<br>
Think C<br>
Thinking Machines Corporation<br>
thinko<br>
thinnet<br>
third generation computer<br>
third generation language -- 'DONE'<br>
third normal form<br>
This can't happen<br>
this dictionary<br>
This time, for sure!<br>
thn<br>
Thomas<br>
thrash<br>
thrashing<br>
thread DONE<br>
threaded<br>
threaded code DONE<br>
threading<br>
Thread Language Zero<br>
thread-safe DONE<br>
three-finger salute DONE<br>
three-letter acronym DONE<br>
three-tier DONE<br>
throughput DONE<br>
thud<br>
Thumb<br>
thumb<br>
thumbnail<br>
thunk<br>
TIA<br>
tick<br>
TickIT<br>
Tickle<br>
tickle a bug<br>
tick-list features<br>
TIFF<br>
tiger team<br>
tight loop<br>
tilde<br>
TILE Forth<br>
Tim Berners-Lee DONE<br>
time bomb<br>
time complexity<br>
Time Complex Simulator<br>
time division multiple access DONE<br>
time division multiplexing DONE<br>
Time Domain Reflectometer DONE<br>
timeout<br>
time quantum<br>
time-sharing DONE<br>
Time Sharing Option<br>
Time Simulator<br>
time sink<br>
time slice<br>
times-or-divided-by<br>
time T<br>
Time to Live -- 'DONE'<br>
time zone DONE<br>
TINC DONE<br>
Tinman<br>
tinman+<br>
TINT<br>
tint<br>
Tiny<br>
Tiny BASIC<br>
Tiny Basic Interpreter Language<br>
Tiny Clos<br>
TIP<br>
TIPL<br>
tip of the ice-cube<br>
tired iron<br>
tits on a keyboard<br>
tj<br>
Tk DONE<br>
tk DONE<br>
TK-90X<br>
TK-95<br>
T. Kohonen<br>
TK!Solver<br>
TL0<br>
TL1<br>
TLA DONE<br>
TLAs NO IMPORT<br>
TLB<br>
TLD<br>
TLI<br>
TL/I<br>
T Lisp<br>
TM<br>
tm<br>
(TM)<br>
TMDL<br>
TMG<br>
TMRC DONE<br>
TMRCie<br>
TMS 9900<br>
tn<br>
tn3270<br>
TNC<br>
TNSTAAFL<br>
TNX<br>
TNXE6<br>
to<br>
to a first approximation<br>
toast<br>
toaster<br>
toasternet<br>
to a zeroth approximation<br>
toeprint<br>
toggle<br>
TOK<br>
token<br>
token bus<br>
token ring DONE<br>
Tom Knight<br>
tone<br>
Tony Hoare<br>
tool <br>
tool bar<br>
toolbook<br>
Toolbuilder<br>
Tool Builder Kit<br>
Tool Command Language<br>
TOOLS<br>
toolsmith<br>
TOP<br>
top-down design<br>
Top-Down Model DONE<br>
topic drift<br>
topic group<br>
topic thread<br>
top-level domain DONE<br>
topology DONE<br>
TOPS-10<br>
TOPS-20 DONE<br>
Tornado<br>
Toronto Euclid<br>
TOS<br>
TOSS<br>
total function DONE<br>
totally ordered<br>
totally ordered set DONE<br>
total ordering<br>
toto<br>
touchpad<br>
touch screen DONE<br>
tourist<br>
touristic<br>
tourist information<br>
Tower Technology Corporation<br>
toy<br>
Toy/Ada<br>
toy language<br>
toy problem<br>
toy program<br>
tp<br>
TPF DONE<br>
TP/IX<br>
TPL<br>
TPO<br>
TPS<br>
tptc<br>
TPU<br>
TPX<br>
tr<br>
TRAC<br>
traceroute -- 'DONE'<br>
trace scheduling<br>
track<br>
track ball<br>
tracker ball<br>
tracking<br>
trackpad<br>
Trackpoint<br>
tractor feed<br>
TrafoLa<br>
Trafola-H<br>
trampoline<br>
TRANDIR<br>
TRANQUIL<br>
TRANS<br>
transaction<br>
Transaction Application Language DONE<br>
Transaction Processing Facility<br>
transceiver DONE<br>
TRANSCODE<br>
transducer<br>
transfer syntax<br>
transfinite induction DONE<br>
transformation DONE<br>
transient<br>
transistor DONE<br>
Transistor-Transistor Logic<br>
TRANSIT<br>
transitive DONE<br>
transitive closure<br>
transit network<br>
Translation Look-aside Buffer<br>
Transmission Control Protocol DONE<br>
transparent<br>
Transport Driver Interface<br>
transport layer<br>
Transport Layer Interface<br>
Transport Level Interface<br>
Transport Service Access Point<br>
transputer DONE as INMOS Transputer<br>
TRANS-USE<br>
trap <br>
trap door<br>
trap-door function<br>
trash<br>
Trash-80<br>
traveling salesman problem DONE<br>
travelling salesman problem NO IMPORT<br>
trawl<br>
tree<br>
tree-killer<br>
TREET<br>
TREETRAN<br>
Tree Transformation Language<br>
treeware<br>
Trellis<br>
Trellis Code Modulation<br>
Trident<br>
trigger<br>
trigger finger<br>
TRIGMAN<br>
trillion DONE<br>
Trilogy<br>
triple DES DONE<br>
tri state<br>
trit<br>
Triton DONE<br>
Triton II DONE<br>
Triton VX DONE<br>
Trivial File Transfer Protocol DONE<br>
TRO<br>
troff DONE<br>
troglodyte<br>
troglodyte mode<br>
Trojan horse DONE<br>
TROLL <br>
troll DONE<br>
TRON<br>
tron<br>
Trouble Came Back<br>
TRS<br>
TRS-80 DONE<br>
True BASIC<br>
true colour<br>
true hacker<br>
TrueType DONE<br>
Trumpet<br>
TRUSIX<br>
truth table DONE<br>
TS<br>
TSAP<br>
TSEE<br>
TSIA<br>
Tsim<br>
TSL-1<br>
TSO<br>
TSP<br>
TSR DONE<br>
TSV<br>
tt<br>
TTD<br>
TTFN<br>
TTL DONE<br>
TTS<br>
tty DONE<br>
TTYL<br>
TUB<br>
TUBA<br>
tube<br>
tube time<br>
Tuckals<br>
Tui<br>
Tuki<br>
tunafish<br>
tune<br>
tunnelling<br>
TUPLE<br>
tuple DONE<br>
tuple calculus<br>
Tuple Space Smalltalk<br>
tupling<br>
Turbo C DONE<br>
Turbo Debugger<br>
turbo nerd<br>
Turbo Pascal DONE<br>
Turbo Prolog DONE<br>
Turing<br>
Turing Machine<br>
Turingol<br>
Turing Plus<br>
Turing tar-pit<br>
Turing test DONE<br>
turist<br>
TURN<br>
turn-key<br>
TUTOR<br>
TUXEDO<br>
TV DONE<br>
tv DONE<br>
tw<br>
TWAIN DONE<br>
tweak<br>
tweening<br>
tweeter<br>
TWENEX DONE<br>
Twente Compiler Generator System<br>
Twentel<br>
twiddle<br>
TWIG<br>
twilight zone<br>
twink<br>
twinning<br>
twip<br>
twirling baton<br>
twisted pair DONE<br>
twisted pair only NO IMPORT<br>
twm<br>
.twmrc<br>
two-binary, one-quaternary DONE<br>
twonkie<br>
two-phase commit<br>
twos complement<br>
two-to-the-N<br>
two-valued logic<br>
TX-0<br>
TXL<br>
TYMCOM-X<br>
TYMNET<br>
Tymshare, Inc.<br>
type<br>
type assignment<br>
type class<br>
typed lambda-calculus<br>
TypedProlog<br>
typeface DONE<br>
type inference<br>
type scheme<br>
typo<br>
typographical error<br>
TYPOL<br>
TZ<br>
tz<br>
ua<br>
UAN<br>
UART DONE<br>
UAW<br>
UBASIC<br>
UBD<br>
ubiquitous computing DONE<br>
uC++<br>
UCB DONE<br>
U-Code<br>
UCS DONE<br>
UCSD Pascal DONE<br>
UCX<br>
udb<br>
UDF DONE<br>
UDMA DONE<br>
UDP DONE<br>
uemacs<br>
UFO<br>
ug<br>
UGLIAC<br>
UHELP<br>
UI<br>
uid<br>
UIDL<br>
UIL<br>
UIMS<br>
UIMX<br>
UIS<br>
uk<br>
UKC<br>
UKERNA<br>
UKUUG<br>
ULCC<br>
Ulm's Modula-2 System<br>
ULP<br>
Ultra64<br>
Ultra-ATA<br>
Ultra DMA<br>
Ultra-SCSI<br>
Ultrix<br>
um<br>
UMB<br>
UMB Scheme<br>
UMDL<br>
UML DONE<br>
uML DONE<br>
UMTS DONE<br>
unary DONE<br>
UNC<br>
UNCL<br>
UNCOL<br>
uncompression<br>
uncountable DONE<br>
uncurrying<br>
undefined external reference<br>
underflow<br>
Undernet<br>
underscore<br>
under the hood<br>
undocumented feature DONE<br>
U-NET Limited<br>
unfold<br>
unfold/fold<br>
UNI<br>
Unicode DONE<br>
UniCOMAL<br>
unicos<br>
Uniface<br>
unification<br>
Unified Han<br>
Unified Modeling Language DONE<br>
unifier<br>
UNIFORM<br>
Uniform Naming Convention<br>
Uniform Resource Citation<br>
Uniform Resource Locater<br>
Uniform Resource Locator<br>
Uniform Resource Name<br>
Uniform Resource Number<br>
Unify<br>
unify<br>
Unify Corporation<br>
Unihan<br>
uninstaller<br>
uninteresting<br>
Uninterruptible Power Supply DONE<br>
Unipalm Group plc<br>
Unipress Software, Inc.<br>
uniprocessor<br>
UNIQUE<br>
Unique ID Listing<br>
unique key<br>
unique sales point<br>
UNISAP<br>
Unisys Corporation DONE<br>
United Technologies Research Cente<br>
Unit Separator<br>
UNITY<br>
Univac NO IMPORT<br>
Universal algebra DONE<br>
Universal Asynchronous Receiver/Transmitter<br>
Universal Character Set<br>
Universal Communications X<br>
Universal Debugger<br>
Universal Disk Format<br>
universal quantifier DONE<br>
Universal Resource Identifier<br>
Universal Resource Locator<br>
Universal Serial Bus DONE<br>
universal thunk<br>
Universal Time DONE<br>
Universal Time Coordinated DONE<br>
University of ArizonaDONE <br>
University of California at Berkeley DONE<br>
University of Durham DONE<br>
University of East London<br>
University of Edinburgh DONE<br>
University of Hawaii<br>
University of Iceland<br>
University of London Computing Centre<br>
University of Michigan DONE<br>
University of Michigan Digital Library Project<br>
University of Minnesota DONE<br>
University of Nijmegen DONE<br>
University of Pennsylvania DONE<br>
University of Tasmania<br>
University of Twente<br>
Unix DONE<br>
Unix box<br>
Unix brain damage<br>
Unix conspiracy<br>
Unix International<br>
Unixism<br>
Unix man page<br>
Unix manual page<br>
Unix System V<br>
Unix to Unix Copy<br>
UnixWare<br>
Unix weenie<br>
Unix wizard<br>
unnormalised<br>
unproto<br>
unshar<br>
unshielded twisted pair<br>
unswizzle<br>
unwind-protect<br>
unwind the stack<br>
UN*X<br>
unzip<br>
up dowon<br>
uparrow<br>
uparrow<br>
UPenn<br>
upgradability<br>
upgrade<br>
upgradeability<br>
upload DONE<br>
UPMAIL Tricia Prolog<br>
upper bound DONE<br>
Upper Layer Protocol<br>
upper memory block<br>
Upper Side-Band modulation<br>
UPS DONE<br>
upstream<br>
upthread<br>
upward closure<br>
Uranus<br>
urban legend DONE<br>
URC<br>
urchin<br>
URI DONE<br>
URL DONE<br>
URL forwarding<br>
URL redirection<br>
URN<br>
URouLette<br>
US DONE<br>
us DONE<br>
usability DONE<br>
USAModSim<br>
usa.net<br>
US-ASCII<br>
USB DONE<br>
USE<br>
Usenet DONE<br>
Usenet news NO IMPORT<br>
Usenetter NO IMPORT<br>
USENIX<br>
user DONE<br>
user base<br>
User Brain Damage<br>
User Datagram Protocol DONE<br>
user-friendly DONE<br>
user id<br>
user identifier<br>
user interface DONE<br>
user interface copyright<br>
User Interface Language<br>
user name DONE<br>
User Network Interface<br>
user-obsequious<br>
user-unctuous<br>
Use the Source Luke<br>
USG Unix<br>
usim<br>
USL<br>
USP<br>
USR<br>
usr<br>
US Robotics<br>
U.S. Robotics, Inc.<br>
USSA<br>
UTC DONE<br>
UTF NO IMPORT<br>
UTF-8 DONE<br>
utility-coder<br>
UTOPIST<br>
UTP <br>
UTRC<br>
UTSL<br>
uucp<br>
UUCPNET<br>
uudecode<br>
uuencode<br>
UUNET PIPEX<br>
UUPC<br>
uy<br>
uz<br>
V<br>
V.21<br>
V.22<br>
V.22bis<br>
V.23<br>
V.24<br>
V.25<br>
V.28<br>
V.32<br>
V.32bis<br>
V.32ter<br>
V.34<br>
V.35<br>
V.42<br>
V.42bis<br>
V.90<br>
V.91<br>
va<br>
vacuum tube DONE<br>
vadding DONE<br>
VAL<br>
Valencia Simple Tasker<br>
valency DONE<br>
Valid<br>
validation DONE<br>
value<br>
Value Added Network<br>
value added reseller<br>
value added retailer<br>
valve DONE<br>
VAN<br>
vanilla<br>
vanity domain<br>
vannevar<br>
Vannevar Bush DONE<br>
vaporware DONE<br>
VAR<br>
Variational Graphics eXtended<br>
VAX DONE<br>
VAX DOCUMENT<br>
VAXectomy<br>
VAXen<br>
vaxherd<br>
vaxism<br>
VAX MIPS<br>
vaxocentrism<br>
VAXset<br>
VAXstation<br>
VAX/VMS<br>
VB<br>
VBA DONE<br>
vbell<br>
VBScript<br>
vbx<br>
vc<br>
VCC filtering<br>
VCID<br>
VCL<br>
VCODE<br>
VCPI<br>
VCR DONE<br>
vdiff<br>
VDL<br>
VDM<br>
VDM++<br>
VDM-SL<br>
VDSL<br>
VDT<br>
VDU DONE<br>
ve<br>
vector DONE<br>
Vector C<br>
vector font<br>
vector graphics DONE<br>
vector processor DONE<br>
vector space DONE <br>
VECTRAN<br>
VEE<br>
veeblefeetzer<br>
veeblefester<br>
veeblefetzer<br>
VEL<br>
Vendor Independent Messaging<br>
ventilator card<br>
Ventura Publisher<br>
Venus flytrap<br>
verbage<br>
verbiage<br>
Verdi DONE<br>
verification<br>
Verilog DONE<br>
Verilog SA<br>
Veronica<br>
Versa Module Europa<br>
version<br>
Version 7<br>
vertical application<br>
vertical bar<br>
vertical encoding<br>
vertical loop combination<br>
vertical microcode<br>
Vertical Redundancy Check<br>
vertical refresh rate<br>
vertical scan rate<br>
Very high bit-rate Digital Subscriber Line<br>
Very Large Database<br>
Very Large Memory<br>
Very Large Scale Integration DONE<br>
Very Long Instruction Word<br>
Very Small Aperture Terminal<br>
VESA DONE<br>
VESA Local Bus DONE<br>
V.FAST<br>
VFAT DONE<br>
V.FC<br>
vg<br>
VGA DONE<br>
VGQF<br>
vgrep<br>
VGX<br>
VHDL DONE<br>
VHE<br>
VHLL<br>
vhost<br>
VHS DONE<br>
vi DONE<br>
VIC-20<br>
video adapter<br>
video card<br>
video compression DONE<br>
video conference<br>
video conferencing<br>
video dial tone<br>
video display terminal<br>
Video Electronics Standards Association DONE<br>
Video Graphics Adapter<br>
Video Graphics Adaptor<br>
Video Graphics Array<br>
video memory<br>
Video on Demand<br>
video RAM<br>
video random access memory<br>
video terminal<br>
videotex DONE<br>
Vienna Definition Language<br>
Vienna Definition Method<br>
Vienna Development Method<br>
Vienna Development Method Specification Language<br>
Vienna Fortran<br>
Vietnamese DONE<br>
viewer<br>
ViewPoints<br>
Views<br>
VIF<br>
Vi Improved<br>
VIM DONE<br>
vines<br>
Vine Technology<br>
Vint Cerf DONE<br>
Vinton Cerf<br>
Viola<br>
virgin<br>
virgule<br>
Viron<br>
virtual<br>
virtual 86 mode<br>
virtual address<br>
virtual cache<br>
virtual circuit DONE<br>
Virtual Circuit Identifier<br>
virtual connection<br>
Virtual Control Program Interface<br>
Virtual Device Driver<br>
Virtual Device Location<br>
virtual disk<br>
Virtual Home Environment<br>
virtual host<br>
Virtual LAN<br>
Virtual Loadable Module<br>
Virtual Local Area Network<br>
Virtual Machine <br>
virtual machine DONE<br>
Virtual Machine/Conversational Monitor System<br>
Virtual Machine Environment<br>
Virtual Machine/ESA<br>
Virtual Machine/System Product<br>
Virtual Machine/XA<br>
virtual memory DONE<br>
Virtual Memory System DONE<br>
virtual path<br>
virtual point of presence<br>
virtual PoP<br>
Virtual Private Network<br>
virtual reality DONE<br>
Virtual Reality Modeling Language<br>
Virtual Sequential Access Method<br>
virtual shredder<br>
Virtual Software Factory<br>
Virtual Storage Extended<br>
Virtual Telecommunications Access Method<br>
virus DONE<br>
viruses DONE<br>
visible bell<br>
visionary<br>
Visual BASIC<br>
Visual Basic for Applications<br>
Visual BASIC Script<br>
visual bell<br>
Visual C++<br>
Visual Component Library<br>
Visual dBASE<br>
Visual Display Unit<br>
Visual FoxPro<br>
Visual Interface<br>
visualisation<br>
visual language<br>
visual programming<br>
visual programming environment<br>
visual programming language<br>
VITAL<br>
VIVID<br>
viz<br>
VLAN<br>
VLB DONE<br>
VLDB<br>
Vlisp<br>
VLIW DONE<br>
VLM<br>
VLSI DONE<br>
VLSM DONE<br>
VM<br>
VM/CMS DONE<br>
VME DONE<br>
VMEbus<br>
VME Microsystems International Corporation<br>
VM/ESA<br>
VML<br>
VMS DONE<br>
VM/SP<br>
VM/XA<br>
vn<br>
vocoder DONE<br>
vocoding<br>
VoD<br>
voice mail<br>
voice-net<br>
Voice over IP DONE<br>
voice recognition<br>
VoIP DONE<br>
volatile<br>
volatile memory<br>
volatile storage<br>
volatile variable<br>
voltage DONE<br>
Volume Table Of Contents<br>
von Neumann integer<br>
von Neumann, John<br>
von Neumann ordinal DONE<br>
voodoo programming DONE<br>
Voronoi diagram<br>
Voronoi polygon<br>
VOS DONE<br>
Voters Telecommunications Watch<br>
voxel<br>
V.pcm<br>
VPL<br>
VPN<br>
VP-Planner<br>
VR<br>
VRAM<br>
VRC<br>
VRML<br>
VRTX<br>
VSAM<br>
VSAT<br>
VSCM<br>
VSE DONE<br>
VSF<br>
VSP<br>
VSTa<br>
VSX<br>
VT<br>
vt100 DONE<br>
vt220<br>
VTAM<br>
VTC<br>
VTOC<br>
VTS<br>
VTW<br>
vu<br>
VUE<br>
VUIT<br>
VULCAN<br>
Vulcan death grip<br>
Vulcan nerve pinch<br>
vulture capitalist<br>
VUP<br>
VxD<br>
VXI<br>
VxWorks<br>
W2K<br>
W3<br>
W3C DONE<br>
W3 Consortium<br>
WA-12<br>
wabbit<br>
Wabi<br>
WabiServer<br>
wacco<br>
Wafe<br>
WAFL<br>
WAIS DONE<br>
WAITS<br>
wait state<br>
waldo<br>
walk<br>
walking drives<br>
walk off the end of<br>
wall<br>
wall clock time<br>
wall follower<br>
wallpaper<br>
wall time<br>
WAM<br>
WAN DONE<br>
Wang Laboratories<br>
wango<br>
wannabee<br>
want list<br>
WAP -- 'DONE'<br>
WAP Forum<br>
wardialer<br>
-ware<br>
warez DONE<br>
WarGames<br>
warlording<br>
warm boot<br>
Warm Silence Software<br>
Warp<br>
wart<br>
washing machine<br>
Wasserman<br>
WATBOL<br>
Watcom C/C++<br>
Watcom International<br>
Watcom SQL<br>
Watcom VX*REXX<br>
Waterfall Model 'DONE'<br>
water MIPS<br>
WATFIV<br>
WATFOR<br>
wav<br>
WAVE<br>
wave a dead chicken DONE<br>
wave division multiplexing DONE<br>
Waveform Generation Language<br>
wavelet DONE<br>
wavetable<br>
wavetable synthesis<br>
WaZOO<br>
WBMP<br>
WBS<br>
WCL DONE<br>
WD<br>
WDASM<br>
WDM<br>
WE<br>
Weak Head Normal Form<br>
weakly typed<br>
weak typing<br>
weasel<br>
WEB DONE<br>
Web DONE<br>
web2c<br>
web browser DONE<br>
webcam DONE<br>
webcasting<br>
WebCGM<br>
WebCOMAL<br>
WebCrawler DONE<br>
webhead<br>
weblint<br>
webmail DONE<br>
webmagistra<br>
webmaster<br>
webmistress<br>
webmonkey<br>
WebObjects<br>
web page DONE<br>
Web Request Broker<br>
web server DONE<br>
web site DONE<br>
web smith<br>
Webster<br>
Webster's Dictionary<br>
wedged<br>
wedgie<br>
wedgitude<br>
Weeble<br>
weeds<br>
weenie<br>
Weenix<br>
weighted search<br>
well-behaved<br>
well-connected<br>
well-ordered set DONE<br>
Wesley Clark<br>
Western Digital Corporation<br>
Westmount<br>
wetware<br>
wf<br>
WFL<br>
WfMC<br>
WFW<br>
WFWG<br>
WG<br>
WGL<br>
whack<br>
whacker<br>
whales<br>
whalesong<br>
whatis<br>
What's a spline?<br>
What You Get Is What You Never Thought You Had<br>
What You See Is All You Get<br>
What You See Is What You Get<br>
wheel<br>
wheel bit<br>
wheel wars<br>
When It's DONE<br>
Whetstone<br>
Which Stands For Nothing<br>
while<br>
White Book<br>
White book CD-ROM<br>
white box testing<br>
White pages DONE<br>
white paper<br>
whitespace<br>
white trash NO IMPORT<br>
WHNF<br>
whois DONE<br>
Whopper<br>
WHQL<br>
WIBNI<br>
Wide Area Information Servers DONE<br>
Wide Area Network DONE<br>
Wideband ATM<br>
Wide SCSI<br>
widget DONE<br>
wiggles<br>
WiLAN<br>
Wild_LIFE<br>
wild card DONE<br>
William Gibson DONE<br>
William Hamilton<br>
William Joy<br>
WIMP<br>
WIMP environment<br>
win<br>
Win2K<br>
Win32<br>
Win32s NO IMPORT<br>
Win 95<br>
Win 98<br>
winchester<br>
windowing system<br>
window manager DONE<br>
Window RAM<br>
Window Random Access Memory<br>
Windows DONE<br>
Windows 1 NO IMPORT<br>
Windows 2<br>
Windows 2000 DONE<br>
Windows/286<br>
Windows 2K NO IMPORT<br>
Windows 3.0<br>
Windows 3.1<br>
Windows 3.11<br>
Windows/386<br>
Windows 4GL<br>
Windows 94<br>
Windows 95 DONE<br>
Windows 98 DONE<br>
Windows Application Binary Interface<br>
Windows CE<br>
Windows for Workgroups<br>
window shopping<br>
Windows Internet Naming Service<br>
Windows Messaging<br>
windows messaging<br>
Windows NT DONE<br>
Windows NT 3.1<br>
Windows NT 3.5<br>
Windows NT 4 NO IMPORT<br>
Windows NT 5 NO IMPORT<br>
Windows NT Network Model<br>
Windows Open Service Architecture<br>
Windows sockets<br>
window system DONE<br>
Windoze<br>
Wind River Systems<br>
winged comments<br>
winkey<br>
winning<br>
winnitude<br>
WINS<br>
Winsock<br>
WinSoft Products Ltd<br>
wintel<br>
WINZIP<br>
wired<br>
wirehead<br>
wireless<br>
Wireless Application Protocol DONE<br>
wireless bitmap<br>
wireless local area network<br>
wirewater<br>
wish list<br>
Wisp<br>
within delta of<br>
within epsilon of<br>
wizard<br>
Wizard Book<br>
wizardly<br>
wizard mode<br>
WizDOM<br>
wk1<br>
WLAN<br>
wmf<br>
WNPP<br>
Wolfram Research, Inc.<br>
WOM<br>
woman<br>
WOMBAT<br>
wombat<br>
wombat.doc.ic.ac.uk<br>
womb box<br>
Woodenman<br>
woofer<br>
WOOL<br>
Worcester Polytechnic Institute<br>
Word DONE<br>
word DONE<br>
Word for Windows<br>
WordPerfect DONE<br>
WordPerfect Corporation<br>
word processing DONE<br>
word processor DONE<br>
word size<br>
word spamming<br>
WordTech<br>
word wrap<br>
workaround<br>
Work Breakdown Structure DONE<br>
workflow DONE<br>
Workflow Management Coalition<br>
workgroup<br>
working as designed<br>
working set<br>
working set model<br>
Work Needed and Prospective Packages<br>
worksheet<br>
workstation DONE<br>
World Time<br>
World-Wide Wait<br>
World-Wide Web DONE<br>
World-Wide Web browser NO IMPORT<br>
World Wide Web Consortium DONE<br>
World-Wide Web Worm<br>
WORM<br>
worm DONE<br>
wormhole DONE<br>
wormhole routing<br>
WOSA<br>
wound around the axle<br>
WPG<br>
WPI<br>
WPL+<br>
WPOP<br>
wps<br>
WRAM<br>
wrap around<br>
wrapper<br>
wrats nest<br>
wrb<br>
write<br>
WRITEACOURSE<br>
write-back DONE<br>
write buffer<br>
Write-Once Read-Many<br>
write-only code<br>
write-only language<br>
write-only memory<br>
write-through DONE<br>
write-thru DONE<br>
writing system<br>
Wrong Thing<br>
WRT<br>
ws<br>
WSFN<br>
WSL<br>
WTF<br>
WTH<br>
wugga wugga<br>
Wumpus DONE<br>
WWW DONE<br>
WWW browser DONE<br>
WWWW<br>
WYGIWYNTYH<br>
WYSIAYG DONE<br>
WYSIWYG DONE<br>

</doc>
<doc id="11339" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11339" title="Wikipedia:Free On-line Dictionary of Computing/E - H">
Wikipedia:Free On-line Dictionary of Computing/E - H

E NO IMPORT - Duplicate info.<br>
E1 NO IMPORT - Esoteric<br>
E2 NO IMPORT - Esoteric<br>
E3 NO IMPORT - Esoteric<br>
E4 NO IMPORT - Esoteric<br>
E5 NO IMPORT - Esoteric<br>
EAF NO IMPORT - Esoteric<br>
EAG DONE<br>
eager evaluation<br>
Eagle NO IMPORT - Esoteric<br>
EAI NO IMPORT - Duplicate info.<br>
EAPROM NO IMPORT - Insignificant info.<br>
earliest deadline first DONE<br>
Early PL/I DONE<br>
EARN<br>
EAROM NO IMPORT - Duplicate info.<br>
earthquake NO IMPORT - Jargon<br>
Ease NO IMPORT - Duplicate info.<br>
EASE II NO IMPORT - Esoteric<br>
EASIAC NO IMPORT - Esoteric<br>
EAST NO IMPORT - Esoteric<br>
easter egg<br>
Easter egging<br>
Eastern Washington University<br>
EASY FOX NO IMPORT - Esoteric<br>
eat flaming death<br>
EBASIC<br>
EBCDIC<br>
EBCIDIC<br>
EBNF<br>
Ebone<br>
ec<br>
EC++<br>
ECAP II<br>
E-carrier system<br>
Ecash<br>
ECC<br>
Eccles-Jordan circuit<br>
Echidna<br>
echo<br>
echo cancellation<br>
ECHT<br>
ECIP2<br>
ECIS<br>
Eckert-Mauchly Computer Corporation<br>
ECL<br>
ECLIPSE<br>
ECM<br>
ECMA<br>
e-commerce<br>
Econet<br>
ECOOP<br>
ECP<br>
ECRC<br>
ECRC-Prolog<br>
ECSL<br>
ECSP<br>
ECSS II<br>
ECSSL<br>
ed<br>
EDA<br>
e-ddress<br>
Eden<br>
EDF<br>
EDI<br>
EDIF<br>
EDIFACT<br>
Edinburgh Multi Access System<br>
Edinburgh Prolog<br>
Edinburgh SML<br>
Edison<br>
EDL<br>
EDM<br>
EdML<br>
EDMS<br>
EDO DRAM<br>
EDO memory<br>
EDO RAM<br>
EDP<br>
EDRAM<br>
e-dress<br>
EDS+<br>
edu<br>
edutainment<br>
Edward Lorenz<br>
Edward Yourdon<br>
ee<br>
EEMA<br>
EEPROM<br>
EER<br>
E. F. Codd<br>
EFF<br>
effective computable<br>
effective number of bits<br>
Effort Adjustment Factor<br>
EFL<br>
EFNet<br>
Eforth<br>
E-Forth<br>
EFT<br>
EFTS<br>
eg<br>
EGA<br>
egosurfing<br>
EGP<br>
egrep<br>
Eh<br>
eh<br>
EHTS<br>
EIA<br>
EIA-232<br>
EIDE<br>
Eiffel<br>
Eiffel source checker<br>
eigenvalue<br>
eigenvector<br>
eight-bit clean<br>
eight queens problem<br>
eight queens puzzle<br>
eighty-column mind<br>
EISA -- DONE (redirected to Extended Industry Standard Architecture)<br>
EJB<br>
EL1<br>
el(alpha)<br>
Elan<br>
El Camino Bignum<br>
elder days<br>
Electing a Pope<br>
Electrically Alterable Programmable Read-Only Memory<br>
Electrically Erasable Programmable Read-Only Memory<br>
Electromagnetic Compatibility<br>
electromigration<br>
electron<br>
electronic commerce<br>
Electronic Commerce Dictionary<br>
electronic data interchange<br>
Electronic Data Processing<br>
Electronic Design Automation<br>
Electronic Frontier Foundation<br>
electronic funds transfer<br>
electronic funds transfer system<br>
electronic magazine<br>
electronic mail<br>
electronic mail address<br>
electronic meeting<br>
Electronic Numerical Integrator and Computer<br>
Electronic Performance Support System<br>
Electronics Industry Association<br>
electronic whiteboarding<br>
electron model<br>
electron tube<br>
Electrostatic Discharge<br>
elegant<br>
element <br>
elephant<br>
elephantine<br>
elevator controller<br>
ELF<br>
ELI<br>
Eli Compiler Construction System<br>
ELISP<br>
elite<br>
ELIZA DONE<br>
ELIZA effect DONE<br>
Elk<br>
ELLA<br>
Ellemtel<br>
Ellie<br>
ELLIS<br>
elm<br>
ELMAGUIDE<br>
ELMAMETA<br>
ELP<br>
ELSIE<br>
Elvis<br>
elvish<br>
EM<br>
EM-1<br>
EMA<br>
Emacs<br>
Emacs Lisp<br>
e-mail<br>
e-mail address<br>
EMAS<br>
Embedded Lisp Interpreter<br>
Embedded Mode<br>
embedded system<br>
embedding<br>
EMBLA Pro<br>
embosser<br>
EMC<br>
EMD Enterprises, Inc.<br>
EMDIR<br>
Emerald<br>
Emitter Coupled Logic<br>
EML<br>
EMM<br>
EMM386<br>
emote<br>
emoticon<br>
empeg<br>
empire<br>
empty element tag<br>
EMS<br>
emTeX<br>
EMU8000<br>
emulation<br>
emulator<br>
Emulator program<br>
EMX<br>
enabling<br>
Encapsulated PostScript<br>
encapsulation<br>
encode<br>
encoder<br>
encryption<br>
-endian<br>
endless loop<br>
End Of Line<br>
End of Medium<br>
End Of Text<br>
End Of Transmission<br>
end tag<br>
End Transmission Block<br>
end-user<br>
Engelbart, Douglas<br>
engine<br>
English programming language<br>
Enhanced Capabilities Port<br>
Enhanced Dynamic Random Access Memory<br>
Enhanced Graphics Adapter<br>
Enhanced IDE<br>
Enhanced Integrated Drive Electronics<br>
enhanced parallel port<br>
Enhanced Small Disk Interface<br>
enhancement<br>
ENIAC<br>
Enigma<br>
ENOB<br>
ENQ<br>
Ente Nazionale Italiano di Unificazione<br>
enterprise<br>
Enterprise Application Integration<br>
Enterprise JavaBeans<br>
Enterprise Resource Planning<br>
Enterprise Systems CONnectivity<br>
EntireX<br>
entity-relationship diagram<br>
entity-relationship model<br>
entropy<br>
Entry Sequenced Data Set<br>
enumerated type<br>
enumeration<br>
environment<br>
environment variable<br>
Envoy<br>
EOF DONE<br>
EOL<br>
EOT<br>
EOU<br>
EOUG<br>
EP<br>
EPCS<br>
EPILOG<br>
EPIM<br>
EPL<br>
epoch<br>
EPP<br>
EPROM<br>
EPROM OTP<br>
EPROS<br>
EPS<br>
EPSILON<br>
epsilon<br>
epsilon squared<br>
EPSIMONE<br>
EPSS<br>
EqL<br>
EQLOG<br>
EQLog<br>
Eqn<br>
equals<br>
equational logic<br>
Equel<br>
equivalence class<br>
equivalence class partitioning<br>
equivalence relation<br>
ER<br>
er<br>
ERA DONE (Engineering Research Associates)<br>
era<br>
Erasable Programmable Read-Only Memory<br>
erase<br>
ERC<br>
ERCIM<br>
ERD<br>
EREW PRAM<br>
ERFPI<br>
ergonomic<br>
ergonomics<br>
ERGO-Shell<br>
Eric Conspiracy<br>
Eric S. Raymond<br>
Eris<br>
Erlang<br>
erotica<br>
ERP<br>
error<br>
error-based testing<br>
error correcting memory<br>
error detection and correction<br>
es<br>
ES-1<br>
ESA<br>
ESC<br>
ESCAPE<br>
escape<br>
escape sequence<br>
ESCD<br>
ESCON<br>
escrow<br>
ESD<br>
ESDI<br>
ESF<br>
ESI<br>
esim<br>
ESL<br>
ESLPDPRO<br>
ESML<br>
ESMTP<br>
ESP<br>
ESPOL<br>
ESPRIT<br>
ESR<br>
essential complexity<br>
Estelle<br>
Esterel<br>
EstPC<br>
ET<br>
et<br>
ET++<br>
eta abstraction<br>
eta conversion<br>
eta expansion<br>
eta reduction<br>
ETB<br>
ETC<br>
e-text<br>
ETHER<br>
EtherGate<br>
Ethernet DONE<br>
Ethernet address<br>
Ethernet meltdown<br>
EtherTalk<br>
ethics<br>
ETM<br>
ETRN<br>
ETSI<br>
ETX<br>
Euclid<br>
Euclidean Algorithm<br>
Euclid's Algorithm<br>
Eudora<br>
EULA<br>
EULER<br>
EuLisp<br>
EUnet Ltd.<br>
Euphoria<br>
Eureka<br>
Eureka step<br>
Eurisko<br>
Eurocard<br>
Euro-ISDN<br>
EuroNet<br>
EuropaNET<br>
European Academic and Research Network<br>
European Computer-Industry Research Centre GmbH<br>
European Strategic Programme for Research in Information Technology<br>
European Telecommunications Standards Institute<br>
EUUG<br>
EV6<br>
Eva<br>
EVALUATE<br>
evaluation<br>
evaluation strategy<br>
evaluator<br>
EVE<br>
event<br>
event-driven<br>
EVGA<br>
evil<br>
evil and rude<br>
evolutionary algorithm<br>
evolutionary computation<br>
evolutionary programming<br>
evolution strategy<br>
EWOS<br>
exa-<br>
Exabyte<br>
exabyte<br>
examining the entrails<br>
EXAPT<br>
Exceed<br>
Excel<br>
Excelan<br>
Excelerator<br>
exception<br>
exception handler<br>
EXCH<br>
Exchange Server<br>
excl<br>
exclamation mark<br>
EXE<br>
EXEC<br>
exec<br>
EXEC 2<br>
EXEC 8<br>
executable<br>
executable content<br>
execute<br>
execution<br>
executive<br>
Executive Systems Programming Oriented Language<br>
exercise, left as an<br>
exhaustive testing<br>
existential quantifier<br>
EXODUS<br>
eXodus<br>
EXOS<br>
expanded memory<br>
expanded memory manager<br>
expanded memory page frame<br>
Expanded Memory Specification<br>
expansion card<br>
expansion slot<br>
expect<br>
eXperimental LISP<br>
Experimental Physics Control Systems<br>
Experimental Programming Language<br>
Expert Judgement Models<br>
expert system<br>
Expert Systems Ltd.<br>
explicit parallelism<br>
explicit type conversion<br>
exploit<br>
Exploratory Data Analysis<br>
exponent<br>
exponential<br>
exponential-time<br>
exponential-time algorithm<br>
Express<br>
expression<br>
expression tree<br>
extend<br>
extended addressing<br>
Extended Affix Grammar DONE<br>
Extended ALGOL<br>
Extended Architecture<br>
Extended Backus-Naur Form<br>
Extended Binary Coded Decimal Interchange Code<br>
Extended BNF<br>
Extended C++<br>
Extended Capabilities Port<br>
Extended Concurrent Prolog<br>
Extended Data Out Dynamic Random Access Memory<br>
Extended Data Out Random Access Memory<br>
Extended Fortran Language<br>
eXtended Graphics Array<br>
Extended Industry-Standard Architecture<br>
extended memory<br>
extended memory manager<br>
Extended Memory Specification<br>
Extended ML<br>
Extended Pascal<br>
Extended Self-containing Prolog<br>
Extended System Configuration Data<br>
Extended Tiny<br>
Extended Video Graphics Array<br>
eXtended Video Graphics Array<br>
extensible<br>
extensible database<br>
Extensible Markup Language<br>
Extensible Shell<br>
Extensible Stylesheet Language<br>
Extensible VAX Editor<br>
extension<br>
extensional<br>
extensional equality<br>
extensionality<br>
Extension Language Kit<br>
Exterior Gateway Protocol<br>
eXternal Data Representation<br>
external memory<br>
EXTRA<br>
extranet<br>
EXUG<br>
eyeball search DONE<br>
EZ<br>
ezd<br>
e-zine<br>
f2c<br>
F2F<br>
F68K<br>
FAC<br>
face time<br>
face-to-face<br>
Facile<br>
facsimile<br>
FACT<br>
fact<br>
factor<br>
FAD<br>
failover<br>
failure<br>
failure-directed testing<br>
FAIR<br>
Fairchild F8<br>
fall back<br>
fall forward<br>
fall over<br>
fall through<br>
fall thru<br>
FALSE<br>
fandango on core<br>
FAP<br>
FAQ<br>
FAQL<br>
FAQ list<br>
faradise<br>
farkled<br>
farm<br>
farming<br>
FARNET<br>
fas<br>
FASBOL<br>
fascist<br>
FASE<br>
FAST<br>
Fast ATA<br>
Fast ATA-2<br>
Fast Ethernet<br>
Fast Fourier Transform<br>
Fast Packet<br>
Fast Page Mode Dynamic Random Access Memory<br>
Fast SCSI<br>
FAT<br>
FAT32<br>
fatal<br>
fatal error<br>
fatal exception<br>
fat binary<br>
fat client<br>
fat electrons<br>
fault<br>
fault-based testing<br>
fault tolerance<br>
fault tolerant<br>
fault tree analysis<br>
fax<br>
Fax over IP<br>
FC<br>
FC-AL<br>
FCB<br>
F-code<br>
FCP<br>
FC-PGA<br>
FCS<br>
FDC<br>
FDDI DONE<br> 
FDISK<br>
fd leak<br>
fdlibm<br>
FDMA<br>
FDSE<br>
FDSP<br>
FDT<br>
fdx<br>
FEA<br>
fear and loathing<br>
feasible<br>
feature<br>
feature creature<br>
feature creep<br>
featurectomy<br>
feature key<br>
feature shock<br>
FEC<br>
Federal Geographic Data Committee<br>
Federal Information Exchange<br>
Federal Information Processing Standards<br>
Federal Networking Council<br>
Federation Against Software Theft<br>
feedback<br>
feedback control<br>
feed-forward<br>
Feel<br>
feep<br>
feeper<br>
feeping creature<br>
feeping creaturism<br>
FEL<br>
femto-<br>
fence<br>
fencepost error<br>
fepped out<br>
FEPROM<br>
Fermat prime<br>
Ferranti F100-L<br>
ferrite core memory<br>
Ferroelectric RAM<br>
Ferroelectric Random Access Memory<br>
Fetch<br>
fetch-execute cycle<br>
FF<br>
ffccc<br>
FFP<br>
FFT<br>
FGDC<br>
FGHC<br>
FGL<br>
FGL+LV<br>
FGRAAL<br>
fgrep<br>
FHS<br>
fi<br>
Fiber Distributed Data Interface<br>
Fiber Optic InterRepeater Link<br>
fiber optics<br>
Fibonacci series<br>
Fibre Channel<br>
Fibre Channel-Arbitrated Loop<br>
fibre optics<br>
FIDIL<br>
FIDO<br>
FidoNet<br>
field<br>
field circus<br>
field effect transistor<br>
field mouse<br>
field-programmable gate array<br>
field servoid<br>
FIFO<br>
Fifth<br>
Fifth Dimension Technologies<br>
fifth generation language<br>
fifth normal form<br>
Fight-o-net<br>
file<br>
File Allocation Table<br>
File Attach<br>
File Composition<br>
file compression<br>
file control block<br>
file descriptor<br>
file descriptor leak<br>
file extension<br>
FileMaker<br>
FileMaker, Inc.<br>
filename extension<br>
FileNet<br>
File Request<br>
File Separator<br>
file server<br>
File Service Protocol<br>
file signature<br>
file system<br>
Filesystem Hierarchy Standard<br>
file transfer<br>
File Transfer Protocol<br>
file type<br>
filing system<br>
filk<br>
fill-out form<br>
film at 11<br>
FILO<br>
Filtabyte<br>
filter<br>
filter promotion<br>
FIMS<br>
Finagle's Law<br>
Financial Information eXchange<br>
fine adjuster<br>
fine grain<br>
finger<br>
finger-pointing syndrome<br>
finite<br>
Finite Automata<br>
Finite Automaton<br>
finite differencing<br>
Finite Impulse Response<br>
Finite State Automata<br>
Finite State Automaton<br>
Finite State Machine<br>
finn<br>
FIPS<br>
FIR<br>
firebottle<br>
firefighting<br>
firehose syndrome<br>
firewall<br>
firewall code<br>
firewall machine<br>
Firewire -- DONE<br>
fireworks mode<br>
Firmware<br>
firmy<br>
first class module<br>
First Fit<br>
first generation computer<br>
first generation language<br>
first-in first-out<br>
first normal form<br>
first-order<br>
first-order logic<br>
First Party DMA<br>
fish<br>
FISH queue<br>
FITNR<br>
FITS<br>
FIX<br>
fix<br>
fixed disk<br>
fixed point<br>
fixed-point<br>
fixed point combinator<br>
fixed-width<br>
FIXME<br>
fixpoint<br>
fj<br>
Fjolnir<br>
fk<br>
FL<br>
F+L<br>
flag<br>
flag day<br>
FLAIR<br>
flaky<br>
flamage<br>
flame<br>
flame bait<br>
flame off<br>
flame on<br>
flamer<br>
flame war<br>
flaming<br>
FLAP<br>
flap<br>
flapping router<br>
flarp<br>
Flash<br>
Flash EPROM<br>
Flash Erasable Programmable Read-Only Memory<br>
flash memory<br>
Flash ROM<br>
flat<br>
flat address space<br>
flat ASCII<br>
flat file<br>
flatten<br>
flat thunk<br>
flavor<br>
flavorful<br>
Flavors<br>
flavour<br>
Fleng<br>
FLEX<br>
Flex<br>
Flex++<br>
Flex 2<br>
flib<br>
FLIC<br>
FLIP<br>
Flip Chip Pin Grid Array<br>
flip-flop<br>
flippy<br>
FLIP-SPUR<br>
floating-point<br>
floating-point accelerator<br>
Floating-Point SPECbaserate<br>
Floating-Point SPECbaseratio<br>
Floating-Point SPECrate<br>
Floating-Point SPECratio<br>
floating point underflow<br>
Floating-Point Unit<br>
floating underflow<br>
F-Logic<br>
flood<br>
FLOP<br>
Floppy<br>
floppy<br>
floppy disk<br>
floppy disk drive<br>
floppy drive<br>
FLOPS<br>
Flops<br>
floptical<br>
Flow<br>
flow chart<br>
flow control<br>
flower key<br>
FLOW-MATIC or FLOWMATIC<br>
flow of control<br>
FLPL<br>
FLUB<br>
Fluegelman, Andrew<br>
flush<br>
Flynn's taxonomy<br>
fly page<br>
Flyspeck 3<br>
flytrap<br>
FM<br>
fm<br>
FMPL<br>
FMQ<br>
FMS<br>
FMV<br>
FNAL<br>
FNC<br>
fnord<br>
FN tunnelling<br>
fo<br>
FOAD<br>
FOAF<br>
FOCAL<br>
FOCL<br>
FOCUS<br>
focus group<br>
FOD<br>
FOIL<br>
FoIP<br>
FOIRL<br>
fold case<br>
folder<br>
FOLDOC<br>
followup<br>
font<br>
fontology<br>
foo<br>
foobar<br>
foogol<br>
FOOL<br>
fool file<br>
Fools' Lisp<br>
Foonly<br>
FOOP<br>
footprint<br>
for<br>
fora<br>
FORC<br>
Force<br>
ForceOne<br>
ForceTwo<br>
foreground<br>
foreign key<br>
Foresight<br>
for free<br>
fork<br>
fork bomb<br>
forked<br>
for loop<br>
FORM<br>
FORMAC<br>
FORMAL<br>
Formal Description Technique<br>
formal methods DONE <br>
Formal Object Role Modeling Language<br>
formal review<br>
FORMAT-Fortran<br>
Formatting Output Specification Instance<br>
Formes<br>
form factor<br>
form feed<br>
form function<br>
FORML<br>
forms<br>
formula<br>
Formula ALGOL<br>
Forsythe<br>
FORTH<br>
for The Rest Of Them<br>
for The Rest Of Us<br>
Forth Modification Lab<br>
Fortran<br>
Fortran 66<br>
Fortran 77<br>
Fortran 90<br>
Fortran Automatic Symbol Translator<br>
Fortran D<br>
Fortran I<br>
Fortran II<br>
Fortran III<br>
Fortran IV<br>
Fortran-Linda<br>
Fortran M<br>
Fortran Matrix Abstraction Technique Fortran<br>
Fortran-Plus<br>
FORTRANSIT<br>
Fortran V<br>
Fortran VI<br>
Fortrash<br>
FORTRUNCIBLE<br>
fortune cookie<br>
forum<br>
for values of<br>
forward<br>
forward analysis<br>
forward chaining<br>
forward compatibility<br>
forward compatible<br>
forward delta<br>
forward engineering<br>
Forward Error Correction<br>
forwards compatibility<br>
forwards compatible<br>
FORWISS<br>
For Your Information<br>
FOSI<br>
FOSIL<br>
fossil<br>
foundation<br>
FOundation for Research and Technology - Hellas<br>
four-colour glossies<br>
four colour map theorem<br>
four colour theorem<br>
Fourier transform<br>
fourth generation computer<br>
fourth generation language -- DONE<br>
fourth normal form<br>
Fowler-Nordheim tunnelling<br>
FoxBASE+<br>
FoxPRO<br>
Fox Software<br>
FP<br>
FP2<br>
FPA<br>
fpc<br>
FPGA<br>
FPLMTS<br>
FPM<br>
FP/M<br>
FPM DRAM<br>
fprintf<br>
fps<br>
FPU<br>
FQDN<br>
FQL<br>
fr<br>
fractal<br>
fractal compression<br>
fractal dimension<br>
FRAD<br>
fragile<br>
fragment<br>
fragmentation<br>
FRAM<br>
frame<br>
frame buffer<br>
Frame Check Sequence<br>
frame grabber<br>
FrameKit<br>
FrameMaker<br>
frame pointer<br>
frame rate<br>
Frame Relay<br>
Frame Relay Access Device<br>
frames per second<br>
Frame Technology Corporation<br>
framework<br>
Framework 4<br>
framing specification<br>
FRANK<br>
Franz Lisp<br>
FRED<br>
fred<br>
Fredette's Operating System Interface Language<br>
frednet<br>
free<br>
FreeBSD<br>
FreeHEP<br>
Freenet<br>
FreePPP<br>
freerexx<br>
free software<br>
Free Software Foundation<br>
free variable<br>
freeware<br>
freeze<br>
Frege, Gottlob<br>
frequency division multiple access<br>
frequency division multiplexing<br>
Frequency Modulation<br>
Frequency Shift Keying<br>
frequently asked question<br>
Fresco<br>
Fresh<br>
friction feed<br>
fried<br>
Friend<br>
FRINGE<br>
frink<br>
friode<br>
fritterware<br>
FRL<br>
FRMT-FTRN<br>
frob<br>
frobnicate<br>
frobnitz<br>
Frobozz Magic Programming Language<br>
frogging<br>
Frolic<br>
front end<br>
front-end processor<br>
front side bus<br>
frotz "done"<br>
frotzed<br>
frowney<br>
fry<br>
FS<br>
FSB<br>
fsck<br>
FSF<br>
FSK<br>
FSL<br>
FSM<br>
FSP<br>
fsplit<br>
FT<br>
FTAM<br>
FTP<br>
FTP archive<br>
FTP by mail<br>
FTP server<br>
FTP Software, Inc.<br>
FTTP<br>
FTX<br>
FUBAR<br>
FUD<br>
fudge<br>
fudge factor<br>
Fudgets<br>
FUDGIT<br>
FUD wars<br>
Fuel-can<br>
Fugue<br>
Fujitsu<br>
full-custom<br>
full-duplex<br>
full-duplex Switched Ethernet<br>
full laziness<br>
full-motion video<br>
full outer join<br>
fully associative cache<br>
Fully Automated Compiling Technique<br>
fully lazy lambda lifting<br>
fully qualified domain name<br>
fum<br>
function<br>
functional<br>
functional database<br>
functional dependency<br>
functionality<br>
functional language<br>
functional program<br>
functional programming<br>
functional programming language<br>
functional requirements<br>
functional specification<br>
functional testing<br>
functional unit<br>
function application<br>
function complete<br>
Function Graph Language<br>
function key<br>
Function Point Analysis<br>
functor<br>
funky<br>
FUNLOG<br>
FunnelWeb<br>
funny money<br>
furigana<br>
furrfu<br>
FUSE<br>
FUSION<br>
fusion<br>
FutureBasic<br>
future date testing<br>
futz<br>
fuzzball<br>
fuzzy computing<br>
fuzzy logic<br>
fuzzy subset<br>
fweep<br>
FWIW<br>
fx<br>
FX-87<br>
FX-90<br>
FYA<br>
FYI<br>
FYI4<br>
G<br>
&lt<br>g&gt<br><br>
G2<br>
G3<br>
G4<br>
GA<br>
ga<br>
Gabriel<br>
gabriel<br>
Gabriel, Richard<br>
GADS<br>
Gaelic<br>
gag<br>
GAIA<br>
GAL<br>
Galaxy<br>
Galileo<br>
Gambit<br>
games<br>
game tree<br>
GAMMA<br>
gamma correction<br>
GAMS<br>
gamut<br>
GAN<br>
GANDALF<br>
gang bang<br>
GAP<br>
GAPLog<br>
garbageabetical order<br>
garbage collect<br>
garbage collection<br>
Gargoyle<br>
Garnet<br>
GARP<br>
garply<br>
Gartner Group<br>
gas<br>
GASP<br>
gas plasma display<br>
GAT<br>
GATE<br>
gate<br>
gated<br>
Gates<br>
gateway<br>
Gateway 2000<br>
Gauss<br>
Gaussian distribution<br>
gawk<br>
GB<br>
Gb<br>
gb<br>
g-bell<br>
GBIP<br>
GBML<br>
gbps<br>
GC<br>
GCC<br>
GCL<br>
G-Code<br>
GCOS<br>
GCR<br>
GCT<br>
gd<br>
GDB<br>
GDBPSK<br>
Gödel, Kurt<br>
GDI<br>
GDMO<br>
GDPL<br>
GE<br>
ge<br>
GEA<br>
GEANT<br>
GECOM<br>
GECOS<br>
Gedanken<br>
gedanken<br>
geef<br>
geek<br>
geek out<br>
GEI<br>
GE Information Services<br>
GEM DONE<br>
gen<br>
gender mender<br>
Gene Amdahl<br>
General Electric Comprehensive Operating System<br>
General Magic<br>
General Packet Radio Service<br>
General Protection Failure<br>
General Protection Fault<br>
General Public Licence<br>
General Public License<br>
General Public Virus<br>
General Purpose Graphic Language<br>
General Purpose Interface Bus<br>
General Purpose Language<br>
General Purpose Macro-generator<br>
General Recursion Theorem<br>
generate<br>
generation<br>
Generic Array Logic<br>
Generic Expert System Tool<br>
generic identifier<br>
genericity<br>
generic markup<br>
generic programming<br>
Generic Routing Encapsulation<br>
Generic Security Service Application Programming Interface<br>
generic thunk<br>
generic type variable<br>
Genesia<br>
genetic algorithm<br>
genetic algorithms<br>
genetic programming<br>
GEnie Services<br>
Genken Programming Language<br>
GENOVA<br>
gensym<br>
Gensym Corporation<br>
Gensym Standard Interface<br>
Gentleman's Portable Coroutine System<br>
GEN-X<br>
Geographical Information System<br>
Geographic Information System<br>
GEORGE<br>
George Boole<br>
GEOS<br>
GEPURS<br>
Gerald<br>
Gerald Sussman<br>
German<br>
GEST<br>
Get a life!<br>
Get a real computer!<br>
get.com<br>
getty<br>
gf<br>
g file<br>
GFLOPS<br>
GFR<br>
gh<br>
GHC<br>
ghost<br>
ghostscript<br>
ghostview<br>
GHz<br>
GI<br>
gi<br>
Gibson, William<br>
gid<br>
GIF<br>
GIF89<br>
GIF89a<br>
GIFF<br>
gig<br>
giga-<br>
gigabit<br>
gigabits per second<br>
gigabyte<br>
gigaflop<br>
gigaflops<br>
GigaHertz<br>
GIGO<br>
gilley<br>
gillion<br>
Gilmore, John<br>
GIM-1<br>
GIN<br>
GINA<br>
Ginger<br>
GIP<br>
GIPS<br>
GIRL<br>
GIS<br>
GKS<br>
GKS-3D<br>
GL<br>
gl<br>
Glammar<br>
glark<br>
Glasgow Haskell Compiler<br>
GLASS<br>
glass<br>
glass box testing<br>
glassfet<br>
glass tty<br>
GLB<br>
glibc<br>
Glish<br>
Glisp<br>
glitch<br>
glob<br>
global index<br>
globalisation<br>
Global Network Navigator<br>
Global Positioning System<br>
Global System for Mobile Communications<br>
glork<br>
GLOS<br>
GLOW<br>
GLS<br>
GLU<br>
glue<br>
glue language<br>
glyph<br>
Glypnir<br>
gm<br>
GMAP<br>
GMD<br>
GMD Toolbox for Compiler Construction<br>
GMT<br>
gn<br>
gnarly<br>
Gnat<br>
GNN<br>
GNOME<br>
Gnome Computers<br>
GNU<br>
GNU archive site<br>
GNU assembler<br>
GNU awk<br>
GNU BC<br>
GNU C<br>
GNU C Library<br>
GNU DC<br>
GNU E<br>
GNU Emacs<br>
GNU General Public License<br>
GNUMACS<br>
GNU mirror site<br>
GNU Network Object Model Environment<br>
Gnuplot<br>
GNU public licence<br>
GNUS<br>
GNU sed<br>
GNU Smalltalk<br>
GNUStep<br>
GNU superoptimiser<br>
Go<br>
goal<br>
Go Back N<br>
gobble<br>
Godzillagram<br>
Goedel<br>
go-faster stripes<br>
Gofer<br>
Goffin<br>
go flatline<br>
GO-GO<br>
GOL<br>
golden<br>
golf ball printer<br>
GOM<br>
gonk<br>
gonkulator<br>
GOOD<br>
Good Thing<br>
Google<br>
googol<br>
googolplex<br>
gopher<br>
Gopher client<br>
Gopher object type<br>
gorets<br>
gorilla arm<br>
go root<br>
gorp<br>
GOSIP<br>
Gosling, James<br>
GOSMACS<br>
Gosperism<br>
GOSPL<br>
gotcha<br>
goto<br>
Gottlob Frege<br>
gov<br>
Government OSI Profile<br>
go voice<br>
GP<br>
gp<br>
GPF<br>
GPIB<br>
GPL<br>
GPM<br>
GPRS<br>
GPS<br>
GPSS<br>
GPV<br>
GPX<br>
gq<br>
gr<br>
GRAAL<br>
Grace Hopper<br>
GRAF<br>
Graffiti<br>
GRAIL<br>
GRAIN<br>
grain<br>
GRAM<br>
grammar<br>
grammar analysis<br>
grammatical inference<br>
granularity<br>
Grapes<br>
Grapevine<br>
graph<br>
Graph Algorithm and Software Package<br>
graph coloring<br>
graph colouring<br>
Graphic ALGOL<br>
Graphical Kernel System<br>
Graphical User Interface<br>
Graphic Display Interface<br>
Graphic Language<br>
graphics accelerator<br>
graphics adapter<br>
graphics adaptor<br>
graphics card<br>
Graphics Interchange Format<br>
Graphics Interface Format<br>
Graphics Language Object System<br>
graphic workstation<br>
Graph-Oriented Object Database<br>
graph plotter<br>
graph reduction<br>
graph rewriting system<br>
GRAPPLE<br>
GRAS<br>
GRASP/Ada<br>
GRASPIN<br>
grault<br>
Gray<br>
graybar land<br>
gray code<br>
gray-scale<br>
&lt<br>gr&amp<br>d&gt<br><br>
GRE<br>
greater than<br>
greatest common divisor<br>
greatest lower bound<br>
Great Renaming<br>
Great Runes<br>
Great Worm<br>
greek<br>
greeking<br>
Green<br>
Green Book<br>
Green Book CD-ROM<br>
green bytes<br>
green card<br>
green lightning<br>
green machine<br>
green monitor<br>
Green's Theorem<br>
Greenwich Mean Time<br>
Greg Olson<br>
grep<br>
grey-scale<br>
Greystone Technologies<br>
GRG<br>
GRIB<br>
grick<br>
grilf<br>
Grim File Reaper<br>
GRIND<br>
grind<br>
grind crank<br>
GRIP<br>
gripenet<br>
gritch<br>
grix<br>
groff<br>
grok<br>
gronk<br>
gronked<br>
group<br>
Group 3<br>
Group 4<br>
Group Code Recording<br>
group identifier<br>
Group Separator<br>
Group-Sweeping Scheduling<br>
Groupware<br>
Groupwise DONE<br>
grovel<br>
grunge<br>
gry<br>
GS<br>
gs<br>
GSBL<br>
GSI<br>
GSL<br>
GSM<br>
GSPL<br>
GSS<br>
GSS-API<br>
gt<br>
gtg<br>
GTL<br>
GT/SQL<br>
gu<br>
guaranteed scheduling<br>
guard NO IMPORT (already exists)<br>
Guarded Horn Clauses<br>
gubbish<br>
GUI<br>
GUIDE<br>
Guide<br>
Guide to Available Mathematical Software<br>
guiltware<br>
gun<br>
gunch<br>
Gunning Transceiver Logic<br>
gunzip<br>
Gupta Corporation<br>
gurfle<br>
guru<br>
guru meditation<br>
Guy Lewis Steele, Jr.<br>
Guy Steele<br>
GVL<br>
gw<br>
GW-Ada<br>
GW-BASIC<br>
gweep<br>
GWHIS<br>
GWM<br>
gy<br>
Gypsy<br>
gz<br>
gzip<br>
h<br>
H.261<br>
H.323<br>
Habitat<br>
hack<br>
hack attack<br>
hacked off<br>
hacked up<br>
hacker<br>
hacker ethic<br>
hacker humour<br>
hacking run<br>
Hacking X for Y<br>
Hackintosh<br>
hackish<br>
hackishness<br>
hackitude<br>
hack mode<br>
hack on<br>
hack together<br>
hack up<br>
hack value<br>
ha ha only serious<br>
hair<br>
hairy<br>
hairy ball<br>
HAKMEM<br>
hakspek<br>
HAL<br>
half-duplex<br>
halftone<br>
HALGOL<br>
HALMAT<br>
HAL/S<br>
Halt and Catch Fire<br>
halting problem<br>
Hamilton<br>
Hamiltonian cycle<br>
Hamiltonian path<br>
Hamiltonian problem<br>
Hamiltonian tour<br>
Hamilton's problem<br>
hammer<br>
Hamming code<br>
Hamming distance<br>
hamster<br>
Han character<br>
HAND<br>
hand cruft<br>
Handel<br>
hand-hacking<br>
Hand-held Personal Computer<br>
handle<br>
hand-roll<br>
handshake<br>
handshaking<br>
handwave<br>
hang<br>
hanja<br>
Hanoi<br>
Han Unification<br>
hanzi<br>
happily<br>
Happy<br>
haque<br>
hard boot<br>
hard-coded<br>
hardcopy<br>
hard disk<br>
hard disk drive<br>
hard drive<br>
hard link<br>
hard sector<br>
hardware<br>
Hardware Abstraction Layer<br>
hardware circular buffer<br>
Hardware Description Language<br>
hardware handshaking<br>
hardwarily<br>
hard-wired<br>
Harris Semiconductor Ltd.<br>
Harvard Graphics<br>
Harvest<br>
Harvest C<br>
hash<br>
hash bucket<br>
hash coding<br>
hash collision<br>
hash function<br>
hashing<br>
hash table<br>
Haskell<br>
Haskell B<br>
Haskell Curry<br>
Haskell User's Gofer System<br>
HASL<br>
HASP<br>
has the X nature<br>
hat<br>
Hayes<br>
Hayes-compatible<br>
HBOOK<br>
hc<br>
HCF<br>
HCI<br>
HCLP<br>
HCPRVR<br>
HCS<br>
HD<br>
HD6309<br>
HDA<br>
HDC<br>
HDD<br>
HDF<br>
HDFL<br>
HDL<br>
HDLC<br>
HDM<br>
HDSL<br>
HDTV<br>
hdx<br>
Head Disk Assembly<br>
header<br>
head normal form<br>
head normalisation theorem<br>
heads down<br>
head-strict<br>
heap<br>
heartbeat<br>
heatseeker<br>
heat sink<br>
heat slug<br>
heavy metal<br>
heavyweight<br>
heavy wizardry<br>
Hebbian<br>
heisenbug<br>
Helen Keller mode<br>
Helix<br>
hello packet<br>
hello, sailor!<br>
hello, world<br>
HELP<br>
henry<br>
HENSA<br>
HEP<br>
HEPDB<br>
HEPiX<br>
HEPnet<br>
HEPVM<br>
HEQS<br>
HERA<br>
HERAKLIT<br>
here document<br>
Herman Hollerith<br>
Hermes<br>
Hesiod<br>
heterogeneous<br>
heterogeneous network<br>
heterogenous<br>
heuristic<br>
heuristics testing<br>
Hewlett-Packard<br>
Hewlett-Packard Graphics Language<br>
Hewlett-Packard Interface Bus<br>
Hewlett Packard Multi Processing Executive<br>
Hewlett Packard Precision Architecture<br>
Hewlett-Packard Visual Engineering Environment<br>
hex<br>
hexadecimal<br>
hexidecimal<br>
hexit<br>
HFC<br>
HHCP<br>
HHOJ<br>
HHOK<br>
HHOS<br>
HIBOL<br>
HID<br>
hidden flag<br>
hierarchical database<br>
Hierarchical Data Format DONE<br>
hierarchical file system<br>
Hierarchical Music Specification Language<br>
hierarchical routing<br>
hierarchy<br>
high bit<br>
High bit-rate Digital Subscriber Line<br>
high colour<br>
high density<br>
Higher Education National Software Archive<br>
higher-order function<br>
higher-order macro<br>
High-level Data Link Control<br>
high-level language<br>
high memory area<br>
high moby<br>
High Performance Computing and Communications<br>
High Performance File System<br>
High Performance Fortran<br>
High Performance Parallel Interface<br>
High Performance Routing<br>
High Performance Serial Bus<br>
High Speed Circuit Switched Data<br>
High Speed Connect<br>
high speed serial interface<br>
High Voltage Differential<br>
HIGZ<br>
hill climbing DONE 
HiLog<br>
HIMEM<br>
hing<br>
HINT<br>
HiPAC<br>
HIPPI<br>
hiragana<br>
hirsute<br>
HISTORIAN<br>
history<br>
hit<br>
Hitachi 6309<br>
Hitachi HD64180<br>
HITL<br>
hit rate<br>
hk<br>
HL7<br>
HLISP<br>
HLL<br>
HLLAPI<br>
hlp<br>
hm<br>
HMA<br>
HMAC<br>
HMP<br>
HMSL<br>
HMTL<br>
hn<br>
Hoare powerdomain<br>
Hobbit<br>
hobbit<br>
hog<br>
HOL<br>
HOL-88<br>
HOL-90<br>
hole<br>
hole model<br>
Hollerithabetical order<br>
Hollerith, Herman<br>
Hollywired<br>
HOL-UNITY<br>
holy wars<br>
home box<br>
home machine<br>
home page<br>
Home Phoneline Networking Alliance <br>
HomePNA<br>
homogeneous<br>
homogenous<br>
homomorphism<br>
Honeywell-800 Business Compiler<br>
HOOD<br>
HOOK<br>
hook<br>
hop (telecommunications)<br>
Hope<br>
Hope+<br>
Hope+C<br>
Hopfield model<br>
Hopfield network<br>
horizontal application<br>
horizontal encoding<br>
horizontal loop combination<br>
horizontal microcode<br>
horizontal scan rate<br>
horizontal tabulation<br>
Horn clause<br>
hose<br>
hosed<br>
HOS-STPL<br>
host<br>
host adaptor<br>
Host Command Facility<br>
host-host layer<br>
hostname<br>
host number<br>
Hot Fix<br>
HotJava<br>
Hotline<br>
Hotline Communications Ltd.<br>
Hotline Connect<br>
hotlink<br>
hotlist<br>
hot spot<br>
Hot Swapable Routing Protocol<br>
hot swapping<br>
HOTT<br>
house wizard<br>
Houston Automatic Spooling Program<br>
HP<br>
hp2ps<br>
H/PC<br>
HPCC<br>
HPcode<br>
HPCode-Plus<br>
HPF<br>
HPFS<br>
HP-GL DONE renamed as HPGL<br>
HP-GL/2 DONE same as above<br>
HP-IB<br>
HPL<br>
HPLOT<br>
HP-MPE<br>
HP-PA DONE, renamed as PA-RISC<br>
HPPI<br>
HPR<br>
HP-SUX<br>
HP-UX<br>
HP VEE<br>
hqx<br>
hr<br>
hs<br>
HSB<br>
HSC<br>
HSCSD<br>
HSL-FX<br>
HSRP<br>
HSSI<br>
HSV<br>
HT<br>
ht<br>
HTH<br>
HTLM<br>
HTML<br>
HTML+<br>
HTTL<br>
HTTP<br>
HTTP/1.0<br>
HTTP cookie<br>
HTTPd<br>
HTTPS<br>
HTTP server<br>
hu<br>
hub<br>
Hubnet<br>
hubs<br>
hue<br>
hue, saturation, brightness<br>
hue, saturation, value<br>
huff<br>
Huffman coding<br>
HUGO<br>
HUGS<br>
Human-Computer Interaction<br>
Human-Computer Interface<br>
Human Interface Device<br>
Human Interface Technology Laboratory<br>
humma<br>
humor<br>
humour<br>
hung<br>
Hungarian Notation<br>
Hungry Programmers<br>
hungry puppy<br>
Hungry ViewKit<br>
hungus<br>
Hunt the Wumpus - Computer game originally on Dartmouth On Line System in the 1970's<br>
Hurd<br>
HVD<br>
Hybrid<br>
Hybrid Fiber Coax<br>
hybrid multiprocessing<br>
hybrid testing<br>
hydrofluorocarbon<br>
HyperBase<br>
Hyper-C<br>
HyperCard<br>
hypercube<br>
Hyperion<br>
hyperlink<br>
Hyper-Man<br>
hypermedia<br>
HyperNeWS<br>
Hyperscript<br>
hyperspace<br>
HyperSPARC<br>
Hyperstrict<br>
HyperTalk<br>
hypertext<br>
Hypertext Markup Language<br>
Hypertext Transfer Protocol<br>
HyperText Transmission Protocol, Secure<br>
hyperware<br>
hysterical reasons<br>
Hytelnet<br>
HyTime<br>

</doc>
<doc id="11344" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11344" title="First-order predicate">
First-order predicate

In mathematical logic, a first-order predicate is a predicate that takes only individual(s) constants or variables as argument(s). Compare second-order predicate and higher-order predicate.
This is not to be confused with a one-place predicate or monad, which is a predicate that takes only one argument. For example the expression "is a planet" is a one-place predicate, while the expression "is father of" is a two-place predicate.

</doc>
<doc id="11345" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11345" title="Snap (gridiron football)">
Snap (gridiron football)

A snap (colloquially called a "hike", "snapback", or "pass from center") is the backwards passing of the ball in gridiron football at the start of play from scrimmage.
The ball begins on the ground with its long axis parallel to the sidelines of the field, its ends marking each team's line of scrimmage in American football; in Canadian football, the line of scrimmage of the team without the ball is 1 yard past their side of the ball. The player snapping the ball (known officially as the "snapper" in rule books) delivers the ball to another player, and that action is the snap. The snapper may hand, throw, or even roll the ball to the other player. The snap must be a quick and continuous movement of the ball by one or both hands of the snapper, and the ball must leave the snapper's hands. The various rules codes have additional requirements, all of which have the effect of requiring the ball to go back to a player behind the line of scrimmage (i.e. in the "backfield"). The snapper almost always passes the ball between his legs, but only in Canadian football is that required.
In the standard gridiron football formation, the center/centre is the snapper and is situated in the middle of the line of scrimmage. Only in arena football is the center required by rule to be the snapper. In other codes, a guard, tackle, tight end or split end can legally deliver the snap; such scenarios, known as an "unbalanced line", are seldom used outside of trick plays and novelties.
For a handed snap, the snapper will usually have his head up, facing opponents. For a thrown snap, especially in formations wherein the ball may be snapped to players in different positions, the snapper will commonly bend over looking between his legs. Because of the vulnerability of a player in such a position, the National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA) and the National Federation of State High School Associations ("Fed") have adopted rules providing that if a player is positioned at least 7 yards behind the neutral zone to receive a snap, opponents are not to deliberately contact the snapper until one second after the snap (NCAA), or until the snapper has a chance to react (Fed). However, in professional football it is common for a center to be able to practice a single "shotgun" formation thrown snap enough to keep his head up and toss it blindly.
A snap is considered a backwards pass, therefore if the ball is snapped and it hits the ground without any player gaining control of the ball the play is ruled as a fumble.
The team entitled to snap the ball will usually know in advance the moment when the snap is to occur as one of their players calls out signals, which usually include a loud sound such as "hut" voiced one or more times, the number of which they know; they are thus said to know the "snap count". Therefore, they have a considerable advantage over their opponents. The Center is not, however, allowed to make motions simulating part of the snap-action; therefore their opponents can be confident the first motion of the ball or the Center's hands is the beginning of the snap.
The snap count is decided on in the huddle, usually expressed as "...on <number>." being the final words spoken by the quarterback after calling the play but before the huddle breaks and the players go to the line of scrimmage. The snap count allows offensive players to have a small head start. The defensive players want to predict the snap, and build up speed such that they cross the line of scrimmage exactly as the play begins, to increase their chances of getting a tackle for a loss or a sack. By varying the snap count, a quarterback forces the defensive players to react to the movement of the offensive players, or risk being called for an offsides or encroachment penalty. Unfortunately for the offense, this advantage can sometimes become a disadvantage. When faced with an exceptionally loud stadium, players may be unable to hear the snap count and are forced to concentrate more on visual cues (silent snap count or a hard count), or risk false start penalties.
The offense must also be mindful of the play clock. If they fail to snap the ball in time they incur a delay of game penalty. Also, with a dwindling play clock, the defense has better chances of guessing when the ball will be snapped. It is easier to predict when the ball will be snapped with 2 seconds left on the play clock, rather than 5 seconds.
The defensive team is not allowed to simulate, by calling out numbers, the offense's snap count. Successfully simulating the count would cause members of the offensive team to act too early ruining co-ordination of the play and inviting penalties. Current rules, unlike earlier rules, position officials so far from the line of scrimmage for 50 minutes of the 60-minute game that it is extremely difficult to hear if the defense is simulating the count.
The snap, the set scrum and ruck in today's rugby union, and the play-the-ball in rugby league have common origins in rugby football. As the rules of rugby's scrimmage were written when the game came to North America, they had a significant flaw which was corrected by custom elsewhere, but by the invention of the snap-in American football.
The rule adopted by a committee for American football in 1880 first provided for the uncontested right of one side to play the ball by foot (in any direction) for a scrimmage. A certain use of the foot on the ball which had the same effect as heeling it back was known as a "snap". Later in the 19th Century, the option of snapping the ball back by hand was added. The option to play the ball with the foot was preserved, however, for several decades, although by early in the 20th Century it was restricted to kicking the ball forward. The kick forward in scrimmage was a surprise play that did not work against a prepared defense. Also for several decades alternatives to the scrimmage for playing the ball from across the sideline after it had gone out of bounds—a throw-in or "fair", and "bounding in"—existed. Until well into the 20th Century, rather than an official readying the ball for scrimmage, the side entitled to the snap had complete custody of the ball and could snap it from the required spot at any time; for instance, a tackled ball carrier might feign injury, then suddenly snap the ball while recumbent, there being no stance requirement yet. The neutral zone and the right of the Center not to be contacted by an opponent before the snap also was not an original feature. As the 20th Century drew to a close, the NCAA and National Federation of State High School Associations extended that protection to some time after the snap, in cases where a player is positioned at least 7 yards deep to receive a thrown snap.
Canadian football used the rugby scrimmage unaltered until near the end of the 19th Century, when, regionally at first, under the influence of the American scrimmage, the number of players in the scrimmage was limited to three—a "centre scrimmager" bound on either side by props called "side scrimmagers". The centre scrimmager was later renamed the "snap", and in intercollegiate play one side was given the right to put foot to ball first. Beginning regionally again and universally by 1923, the Burnside rules led to the 3-man scrimmage being reduced to the centre alone, the number of players on the field being reduced commensurately from 14 to 12, and a snap rule and neutral zone similar to that of American football was adopted. In addition to the between-the-legs requirement noted above, for several years after the adoption of the hand snap, a hand-to-hand snap was illegal, the ball required to be thrown instead, in Canadian football. (Though it was technically legal, the hand-to-hand snap was not used on the American side of the border until the 1930s.) Apparently, a complete break was desired from system of backheeling, and the T formation having gone into eclipse in American football at the time, the Canadian snap was modeled on the formations then in common use in the US, such as the single wing.
The game design rationale for requiring the snap to be a quick and continuous motion to the backfield is to eliminate the need for rules provisions for a live ball in scrimmage. In Rugby Union the ball may be retained by the forwards and played for a time via the foot in a scrummage (which Rugby League has as well) or ruck, or by the hands in a maul, necessitating additional restrictions on play and player positioning during those intervals. In American and Canadian football, the ball as it is put in play is only held in the line (by the Center) for a fraction of a second. The uncontested possession also, as Walter Camp pointed out, allows for better offensive and defensive planning by the side entitled to snap the ball and their opposition, respectively. A muffed snap can be recovered by either team.

</doc>
<doc id="11346" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11346" title="Firewire (disambiguation)">
Firewire (disambiguation)

FireWire is Apple's trademark for the IEEE 1394 interface.
Firewire or Fire wire may also refer to:

</doc>
<doc id="11347" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11347" title="FIFO (computing and electronics)">
FIFO (computing and electronics)

FIFO – an acronym for first in, first out – in computing and in systems theory, is a method for organising the manipulation of a data structure – often, specifically a data buffer – where the oldest (first) entry, or 'head' of the queue, is processed first.
Such processing is analogous to servicing people in a queue area on a first-come, first-served basis, in the same sequence in which they had arrived at the queue's tail.
FCFS is also the jargon term for the FIFO operating system scheduling algorithm, which gives every process central processing unit (CPU) time in the order in which it is demanded. FIFO's opposite is LIFO, last-in-first-out, where the youngest entry or 'top of the stack' is processed first. A priority queue is neither FIFO or LIFO but may adopt similar behaviour temporarily or by default. Queueing theory encompasses these methods for processing data structures, as well as interactions between strict-FIFO queues.
Depending on the application, a FIFO could be implemented as a hardware shift register, or using different memory structures, typically a circular buffer or a kind of list. For information on the abstract data structure, see Queue (data structure). Most software implementations of a FIFO queue are not thread safe and require a locking mechanism to verify the data structure chain is being manipulated by only one thread at a time.
The following code shows a linked list FIFO C++ language implementation. In practice, a number of list implementations exist, including popular Unix systems C sys/queue.h macros or the C++ standard library std::list template, avoiding the need for implementing the data structure from scratch.
using namespace std;
template <typename T>
class FIFO {
public:
};
The ends of a FIFO queue are often referred to as "head" and "tail". Unfortunately, a controversy exists regarding those terms:
In computing environments that support the pipes and filters model for interprocess communication, a FIFO is another name for a named pipe.
Disk controllers can use the FIFO as a disk scheduling algorithm to determine the order in which to service disk I/O requests.
Communication network bridges, switches and routers used in computer networks use FIFOs to hold data packets en route to their next destination. Typically at least one FIFO structure is used per network connection. Some devices feature multiple FIFOs for simultaneously and independently queuing different types of information.
FIFOs are commonly used in electronic circuits for buffering and flow control between hardware and software. In its hardware form, a FIFO primarily consists of a set of read and write pointers, storage and control logic. Storage may be static random access memory (SRAM), flip-flops, latches or any other suitable form of storage. For FIFOs of non-trivial size, a dual-port SRAM is usually used, where one port is dedicated to writing and the other to reading.
A synchronous FIFO is a FIFO where the same clock is used for both reading and writing. An asynchronous FIFO uses different clocks for reading and writing. Asynchronous FIFOs introduce metastability issues.
A common implementation of an asynchronous FIFO uses a Gray code (or any unit distance code) for the read and write pointers to ensure reliable flag generation. One further note concerning flag generation is that one must necessarily use pointer arithmetic to generate flags for asynchronous FIFO implementations. Conversely, one may use either a "leaky bucket" approach or pointer arithmetic to generate flags in synchronous FIFO implementations.
Examples of FIFO status flags include: full, empty, almost full, almost empty, etc.
The first known FIFO implemented in electronics was done by Peter Alfke in 1969 at Fairchild Semiconductors . Peter Alfke was later a director at Xilinx.
A hardware FIFO is used for synchronization purposes. It is often implemented as a circular queue, and thus has two pointers:
Read and write addresses are initially both at the first memory location and the FIFO queue is "empty".
In both cases, the read and write addresses end up being equal. To distinguish between the two situations, a simple and robust solution is to add one extra bit for each read and write address which is inverted each time the address wraps. With this set up, the disambiguation conditions are:

</doc>
<doc id="11350" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11350" title="Firewall (construction)">
Firewall (construction)

A firewall is a fire-resistant barrier used to prevent the spread of fire for a prescribed period of time. Firewalls are built between or through buildings, structures, or electrical substation transformers, or within an aircraft or vehicle.
Firewalls can be used to subdivide a building into separate fire areas and are constructed in accordance with the locally applicable building codes. Firewalls are a portion of a building's passive fire protection systems.
Firewalls can be used to separate-high value transformers at an electrical substation in the event of a mineral oil tank rupture and ignition. The firewall serves as a fire containment wall between one oil-filled transformer and other neighboring transformers, building structures, and site equipment.
There are three main classifications of "fire rated walls": fire walls, fire barriers, and fire partitions. To the layperson, the common use of language typically includes all three when referring to a "firewall" unless distinguishing between them becomes necessary. In addition specialty fire-rated walls such as a High Challenge Fire Wall would require further distinctions.
Fire barrier walls are typically continuous from an exterior wall to an exterior wall, or from a floor below to a floor or roof above, or from one fire barrier wall to another fire barrier wall, having a fire resistance rating equal to or greater than the required rating for the application. Fire barriers are continuous through concealed spaces (e.g., above a ceiling) to the floor deck or roof deck above the barrier. Fire partitions are not required to extend through concealed spaces if the construction assembly forming the bottom of the concealed space, such as the ceiling, has a fire resistance rating at least equal to or greater than the fire partition.
Portions of structures that are subdivided by fire walls are permitted to be considered separate buildings, in that fire walls have sufficient structural stability to maintain the integrity of the wall in the event of the collapse of the building construction on either side of the wall.
Firewalls are used in varied applications that require specific design and performance specifications. Knowing the potential conditions that may exist during a fire are critical to selecting and installing an effective firewall. For example, a firewall designed to meet National Fire Protection Agency, (NFPA), 221-09 section A.5.7 which indicates an average temperature of , is not designed to withstand higher temperatures such as would be present in higher challenge fires, and as a result would fail to function for the expected duration of the listed wall rating.
Performance based design takes into account the potential conditions during a fire. Understanding thermal limitations of materials is essential to using the correct material for the application. Laboratory testing is used to simulate fire scenarios and wall loading conditions. The testing results in an assigned listing number for the fire-rated assembly that defines the expected fire resistance duration and wall structural integrity under the tested conditions. Designers may elect to specify a listed fire wall assembly or design a wall system that would require performance testing to certify the expected protections before use of the designed fire-rated wall system.
Firewalls are also regularly found in aircraft and in specially prepared cars for compartmentalisation and competition use. For example, a typical conversion of a production car for rallying will include a metal firewall which seals the fuel tank off from the interior of the vehicle. In the event of an accident, resulting in fuel spillage, the firewall can prevent burning fuel from entering the passenger compartment, where it could cause serious injury or death. In regular stock cars, the firewall separates the engine compartment from the cabin and can, at times, contain fibreglass insulation. Automotive firewalls have to be fitted so that they form a complete seal. Usually this is done by bonding the sheet metal to the bodywork using fibreglass resin.
The term firewall is also commonly used in American English to refer to the barrier between the passenger and engine compartments of a vehicle. The inner and outer surfaces of the firewall are often coated with noise, vibration, and harshness (NVH) absorber to prevent most engine noise from reaching the passenger compartment. In British English, the term for this barrier is bulkhead.
Fire barriers are used around large electrical transformers as firewalls. 
These barriers are used to isolate one transformer in case of fire or explosions, preventing fire propagation to neighboring transformers.
This could cause a domino effect and affect the surrounding electric grid, particularly during peak times. 
Unlike most fire barriers, transformer fire barriers are often expected to not only defeat fire and heat, but also ballistics, explosions and fragmentation.

</doc>
<doc id="11352" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11352" title="Fenrir (disambiguation)">
Fenrir (disambiguation)

Fenrir, Fenrisulfr or Fenris is a Norse mythological wolf. It may also refer to:

</doc>
<doc id="11353" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11353" title="Frigg">
Frigg

Frigg () is a goddess in Germanic mythology. In Norse mythology, the source of most surviving information about her, she is associated with foresight and wisdom, and dwells in the wetland halls of Fensalir. In wider Germanic mythology, she is known in Old High German as Frīja, in Langobardic as Frea, in Old English as Frīg, and in Old Saxon as Frī. Nearly all sources portray her as the wife of the god Odin.
In Old High German and Old Norse sources, she is specifically connected with Fulla, but she is also associated with the goddesses Lofn, Hlín, Gná, and ambiguously with the Earth, otherwise personified as an apparently separate entity Jörð (Old Norse "Earth"). The children of Frigg and Odin include the gleaming god Baldr. Due to significant thematic overlap, scholars have proposed a connection to the goddess Freyja.
The English weekday name Friday (ultimately meaning 'Frigg's Day') bears her name. After Christianization, the mention of Frigg continued to occur in Scandinavian folklore. During modern times, Frigg has appeared in popular culture, has been the subject of art and receives veneration in Germanic Neopaganism.
The theonyms "Frigg" (Old Norse), "Frīja" (Old High German), "Frīg" (Old English) and "Frī" (Old Saxon) are cognates—linguistic siblings of the same origin. They stem from the Proto-Germanic feminine noun "*Frijjō", which emerged as a substantivized feminine of the adjective *"frijaz" ('free') via Holtzmann's law. In a clan-based societal system, the meaning 'free' arose from the meaning 'related', and the name is etymologically close to the Proto-Germanic verb "*frijōn" ('to love') or to the Sanskrit "priyā" and Avestan "fryā" ('own, dear, beloved'), all ultimately descending from the Proto-Indo-European root "prih₁-", denoting 'one's own, beloved'.
An -a suffix has been sometimes applied by modern editors to denote femininity, resulting in the form "Frigga". This spelling also serves the purpose of distancing the goddess from the English word "frig".
The English weekday name "Friday" comes from Old English "Frīġedæġ", meaning 'day of Frig'. It is cognate with Old High German "frîatac". Several place names refer to Frigg in what are now Norway and Sweden, although her name is altogether absent in recorded place names in Denmark.
The connection with and possible earlier identification of the goddess Freyja with Frigg in the Proto-Germanic period (Frigg and Freyja origin hypothesis) is a matter of scholarly debate. Like the name of the group of gods to which Freyja belongs, the Vanir, the name "Freyja" is not attested outside of Scandinavia. This is in contrast to the name of the goddess "Frigg", who is attested as a goddess common among the Germanic peoples, and whose name is reconstructed as Proto-Germanic *"Frijjō". Evidence does not exist for the existence of a common Germanic goddess from which Old Norse "Freyja" descends, but scholars have commented that this may simply be due to the scarcity of surviving sources.
Regarding a Freyja–Frigg common origin hypothesis, scholar Stephan Grundy comments that "the problem of whether Frigg or Freyja may have been a single goddess originally is a difficult one, made more so by the scantiness of pre-Viking Age references to Germanic goddesses, and the diverse quality of the sources. The best that can be done is to survey the arguments for and against their identity, and to see how well each can be supported."
The 7th-century "Origo Gentis Langobardorum", and Paul the Deacon's 8th-century "Historia Langobardorum" derived from it, recount a founding myth of the Langobards, a Germanic people who ruled a region of what is now Italy (see Lombardy). According to this legend, a "small people" known as the "Winnili" were ruled by a woman named Gambara who had two sons, Ybor and Agio. The Vandals, ruled by Ambri and Assi, came to the Winnili with their army and demanded that they pay them tribute or prepare for war. Ybor, Agio, and their mother Gambara rejected their demands for tribute. Ambra and Assi then asked the god Godan for victory over the Winnili, to which Godan responded (in the longer version in the "Origo"): "Whom I shall first see when at sunrise, to them will I give the victory."
Meanwhile, Ybor and Agio called upon Frea, Godan's wife. Frea counseled them that "at sunrise the Winnil[i] should come, and that their women, with their hair let down around the face in the likeness of a beard should also come with their husbands". At sunrise, Frea turned Godan's bed around to face east and woke him. Godan saw the Winnili, including their whiskered women, and asked "who are those Long-beards?" Frea responded to Godan, "As you have given them a name, give them also the victory". Godan did so, "so that they should defend themselves according to his counsel and obtain the victory". Thenceforth the Winnili were known as the "Langobards" (Langobardic "long-beards").
A 10th-century manuscript found in what is now Merseburg, Germany, features an invocation known as the Second Merseburg Incantation. The incantation calls upon various continental Germanic gods, including Old High German Frija and a goddess associated with her—Volla, to assist in healing a horse:
In the "Poetic Edda", compiled during the 13th century from earlier traditional material, Frigg is mentioned in the poems "Völuspá", "Vafþrúðnismál", the prose of "Grímnismál", "Lokasenna", and "Oddrúnargrátr".
Frigg receives three mentions in the "Poetic Edda" poem "Völuspá". In the first mention the poem recounts that Frigg wept for the death of her son Baldr in Fensalir. Later in the poem, when the future death of Odin is foretold, Odin is referred to as the "beloved of Frigg" and his future death is referred to as the "second grief of Frigg". Like the reference to Frigg weeping in Fensalir earlier in the poem, the implied "first grief" is a reference to the grief she felt upon the death of her son, Baldr.
Frigg plays a prominent role in the prose introduction to the poem, "Grímnismál". The introduction recounts that two sons of king Hrauðungr, Agnar (age 10) and Geirröðr (age 8), once sailed out with a trailing line to catch small fish, but wind drove them out into the ocean and, during the darkness of night, their boat wrecked. The brothers went ashore, where they met a crofter. They stayed on the croft for one winter, during which the couple separately fostered the two children: the old woman fostered Agnar and the old man fostered Geirröðr. Upon the arrival of spring, the old man brought them a ship. The old couple took the boys to the shore, and the old man took Geirröðr aside and spoke to him. The boys entered the boat and a breeze came.
The boat returned to the harbor of their father. Geirröðr, forward in the ship, jumped to shore and pushed the boat, containing his brother, out and said "go where an evil spirit may get thee." Away went the ship and Geirröðr walked to a house, where he was greeted with joy; while the boys were gone, their father had died, and now Geirröðr was king. He "became a splendid man". The scene switches to Odin and Frigg sitting in Hliðskjálf, "look[ing] into all the worlds". Odin says: "'Seest thou Agnar, thy foster-son, where he is getting children a giantess [Old Norse "gȳgi"] in a cave? while Geirröd, my foster son, is a king residing in his country.' Frigg answered, 'He is so inhospitable that he tortures his guests, if he thinks that too many come.'"
Odin replied that this was a great untruth and so the two made a wager. Frigg sent her "waiting-maid" Fulla to warn Geirröðr to be wary, lest a wizard who seeks him should harm him, and that he would know this wizard by the refusal of dogs, no matter how ferocious, to attack the stranger. While it was not true that Geirröðr was inhospitable with his guests, Geirröðr did as instructed and had the wizard arrested. Upon being questioned, the wizard, wearing a blue cloak, said no more than that his name is "Grímnir". Geirröðr has Grímnir tortured and sits him between two fires for 8 nights. Upon the 9th night, Grímnir is brought a full drinking horn by Geirröðr's son, Agnar (so named after Geirröðr's brother), and the poem continues without further mention or involvement of Frigg.
In the poem "Lokasenna", where Loki accuses nearly every female in attendance of promiscuity and/or unfaithfulness, an aggressive exchange occurs between the god Loki and the goddess Frigg (and thereafter between Loki and the goddess Freyja about Frigg). A prose introduction to the poem describes that numerous gods and goddesses attended a banquet held by Ægir. These gods and goddesses include Odin and, "his wife", Frigg.
Frigg is mentioned throughout the "Poetic Edda", compiled in the 13th century by Snorri Sturluson. Frigg is first mentioned in the "Prose Edda" Prologue, wherein a euhemerized account of the Norse gods is provided. The author describes Frigg as the wife of Odin, and, in a case of folk etymology, the author attempts to associate the name "Frigg" with the Latin-influenced form "Frigida". The Prologue adds that both Frigg and Odin "had the gift of prophecy".
In the next section of the "Prose Edda", "Gylfaginning", High tells Gangleri (the king Gylfi in disguise) that Frigg, daughter of Fjörgynn (Old Norse "Fjörgynsdóttir") is married to Odin and that the Æsir are descended from the couple, and adds that "the earth ["Jörðin"] was [Odin's] daughter and his wife". According to High, the two had many sons, the first of which was the mighty god Thor.
Later in "Gylfaginning", Gangleri asks about the "ásynjur", a term for Norse goddesses. High says that "highest" among them is Frigg and that only Freyja "is highest in rank next to her". Frigg dwells in Fensalir "and it is very splendid". In this section of "Gylfaginning", Frigg is also mentioned in connection to other "ásynjur": Fulla carries Frigg's ashen box, "looks after her footwear and shares her secrets"; Lofn is given special permission by Frigg and Odin to "arrange unions" among men and women; Hlín is charged by Frigg to protect those that Frigg deems worthy of keeping from danger; and Gná is sent by Frigg "into various worlds to carry out her business".
In section 49 of "Gylfaginning", a narrative about the fate of Frigg's son Baldr is told. According to High, Baldr once started to have dreams indicating that his life was in danger. When Baldr told his fellow Æsir about his dreams, the gods met together for a thing and decided that they should "request immunity for Baldr from all kinds of danger". Frigg subsequently receives promises from the elements, the environment, diseases, animals, and stones, amongst other things. The request successful, the Æsir make sport of Baldr's newfound invincibility; shot or struck, Baldr remained unharmed. However, Loki discovers this and is not pleased by this turn of events, so, in the form of a woman, he goes to Frigg in Fensalir.
There, Frigg asks this female visitor what the Æsir are up to assembled at the thing. The woman says that all of the Æsir are shooting at Baldr and yet he remains unharmed. Frigg explains that "Weapons and wood will not hurt Baldr. I have received oaths from them all." The woman asks Frigg if all things have sworn not to hurt Baldr, to which Frigg notes one exception; "there grows a shoot of a tree to the west of Val-hall. It is called mistletoe. It seemed young to me to demand the oath from." Loki immediately disappears.
Now armed with mistletoe, Loki arrives at the thing where the Æsir are assembled and tricks the blind Höðr, Baldr's brother, into shooting Baldr with a mistletoe projectile. To the horror of the assembled gods, the mistletoe goes directly through Baldr, killing him. Standing in horror and shock, the gods are initially only able to weep due to their grief. Frigg speaks up and asks "who there was among the Æsir who wished to earn all her love and favour and was willing to ride the road to Hel and try if he could find Baldr, and offer Hel a ransom if she would let Baldr go back to Asgard".
Hermóðr, Baldr's brother, accepts Frigg's request and rides to Hel. Meanwhile, Baldr is given a grand funeral attended by many beings—foremost mentioned of which are his mother and father, Frigg and Odin. During the funeral, Nanna dies of grief and is placed in the funeral pyre with Baldr, her dead husband. Hermóðr locates Baldr and Nanna in Hel. Hermodr secures an agreement for the return of Baldr and with Hermóðr Nanna sends gifts to Frigg (a linen robe) and Fulla (a finger-ring). Hermóðr rides back to the Æsir and tells them what has happened. However, the agreement fails due to the sabotage of a jötunn in a cave named Þökk (Old Norse 'thanks'), described perhaps Loki in disguise.
Frigg is mentioned several times in the "Prose Edda" section "Skáldskaparmál". The first mention occurs at the beginning of the section, where the Æsir and Ásynjur are said to have once held a banquet in a hall in a land of gods, Asgard. Frigg is one of the twelve ásynjur in attendance.
In "Ynglinga saga", the first book of "Heimskringla", a Euhemerized account of the origin of the gods is provided. Frigg is mentioned once. According to the saga, while Odin was away, Odin's brothers Vili and Vé oversaw Odin's holdings. Once, while Odin was gone for an extended period, the Æsir concluded that he was not coming back. His brothers started to divvy up Odin's inheritance, "but his wife Frigg they shared between them. However, a short while afterwards, [Odin] returned and took possession of his wife again.
In "Völsunga saga", the great king Rerir and his wife (unnamed) are unable to conceive a child; "that lack displeased them both, and they fervently implored the gods that they might have a child. It is said that Frigg heard their prayers and told Odin what they asked".
A 12th century depiction of a cloaked but otherwise nude woman riding a large cat appears on a wall in the Schleswig Cathedral in Schleswig-Holstein, Northern Germany. Beside her is similarly a cloaked yet otherwise nude woman riding a distaff. Due to iconographic similarities to the literary record, these figures have been theorized as depictions of Freyja and Frigg respectively.
Due to numerous similarities, some scholars have proposed that the Old Norse goddesses Frigg and Freyja descend from a common entity from the Proto-Germanic period. Regarding a Freyja-Frigg common origin hypothesis, scholar Stephan Grundy comments that "the problem of whether Frigg or Freyja may have been a single goddess originally is a difficult one, made more so by the scantiness of pre-Viking Age references to Germanic goddesses, and the diverse quality of the sources. The best that can be done is to survey the arguments for and against their identity, and to see how well each can be supported."
Unlike Frigg but like the name of the group of gods to which Freyja belongs, the Vanir, the name "Freyja" is not attested outside of Scandinavia, as opposed to the name of the goddess "Frigg", who is attested as a goddess common among the Germanic peoples, and whose name is reconstructed as Proto-Germanic *"Frijjō". Similar proof for the existence of a common Germanic goddess from which "Freyja" descends does not exist, but scholars have commented that this may simply be due to the scarcity of evidence outside of the North Germanic record.
Frigg is referenced in art and literature into the modern period. In the 18th century, Gustav III of Sweden, king of Sweden, composed "Friggja", a play, so named after the goddess, and H. F. Block and Hans Friedrich Blunck's "Frau Frigg und Doktor Faust" in 1937. Other examples include fine art works by K. Ehrenberg ("Frigg, Freyja", drawing, 1883), John Charles Dollman ("Frigga Spinning the Clouds", painting, c. 1900), Emil Doepler ("Wodan und Frea am Himmelsfenster", painting, 1901), and H. Thoma ("Fricka", drawing, date not provided).

</doc>
<doc id="11355" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11355" title="Freehold">
Freehold

Freehold may refer to:

</doc>
<doc id="11358" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11358" title="Felix Wankel">
Felix Wankel

Felix Heinrich Wankel (13 August 1902 – 9 October 1988) was a German mechanical engineer and inventor after whom the Wankel engine was named.
Wankel was born in 1902 in Lahr in what was then the Grand Duchy of Baden in the Upper Rhine Plain of present-day southwestern Germany. He was the only son of Gerty Wankel (née Heidlauff) and Rudolf Wankel, a forest assessor. His father died in World War I. Thereafter, the family moved to Heidelberg. He went to high schools in Donaueschingen, Heidelberg, and Weinheim, and left school without Abitur in 1921. He learned the trade of purchaser at the Carl Winter Press in Heidelberg and worked for the publishing house until June 1926. He and some friends had already run an unofficial afterwork machine shop in a backyard shed in Heidelberg since 1924. Wankel now determined to receive unemployment benefits and to focus on the machine shop. One of his friends, who had graduated from university, gave his name and transformed the shop into an official garage for DKW and Cleveland motor bikes in 1927, where Wankel worked from time to time until his arrest in 1933.
Wankel was gifted since childhood with an ingenious spatial imagination and became interested in the world of machines, especially combustion engines. After his mother was widowed, Wankel could not afford university education or even an apprenticeship. He was, however, able to teach himself technical subjects. At age 17 he told friends that he had dreamt of constructing a car with "a new type of engine, half turbine, half reciprocating. It is my invention!". True to this prediction, he conceived the Wankel engine in 1924 and won his first patent in 1929.
During the early 1920s Wankel was a member of various radical anti-Semitic organizations. In 1921 he joined the Heidelberg branch of the Deutschvölkischer Schutz- und Trutzbund and in 1922 he became a member of the NSDAP, the National Socialist German Workers Party (or "Nazi Party") , which was banned soon afterwards. Wankel founded and led youth groups associated with a cover-up organization of the NSDAP. With them he conducted paramilitary training, scouting games and night walks. When his high esteem for technical innovations was not widely shared among the German Youth Movement, he was offered instead the opportunity to talk about the issue of technology and education to Adolf Hitler and other leading National Socialists in 1928.
In the meantime Wankel's mother had helped founding the local chapter of the NSDAP in his hometown Lahr. Here Wankel not only rejoined the party in 1926, but also met Gauleiter Robert Heinrich Wagner. In 1931 Wagner entrusted Wankel with the leadership of the Hitler Youth in Baden. But both soon fell out with each other, because Wankel tried to put a stronger emphasis on military training, whereas Wagner wished for the Hitler Youth to be a primarily political organization. In a particularly bitter and ugly controversy Wankel publicly accused Wagner of corruption. Wagner paid back by stripping Wankel of his office by early 1932 and managed to have him expelled from the party in October 1932. Wankel, who sympathized with the social-revolutionary wing of the NSDAP among Gregor Strasser anyway, then founded his own National Socialist splinter group in Lahr and continued his attacks on Wagner. Since the Nazi's seizure of power on 30 January 1933 had strengthened his position, Wagner had Wankel arrested and imprisoned in the Lahr jail in March 1933. Only by intervention of Hitler's economic adviser Wilhelm Keppler with Hitler himself, Wankel was set free in September 1933. Keppler had been a friend of Wankel's and an ardent supporter of his technological endeavors since 1927. He now helped Wankel to get state contracts and his own "Wankels Versuchs Werkstätten" in Lindau. Wankel tried to rejoin the NSDAP in 1937, but was turned down. With the help of Keppler, however, he was admitted to the SS in 1940 in the rank of Obersturmbannführer. Two years later his membership was revoked for reasons unknown.
During World War II, Wankel developed seals and rotary valves for German air force aircraft and navy torpedoes, for BMW and Daimler-Benz. After the war, he was imprisoned by France for some months in 1945 and his laboratory was closed by French occupation troops. Wankel's work was confiscated and he was prohibited from doing more work. However, by 1951, he got funding from the Goetze AG company to furnish the new Technical Development Center in his private house in Lindau on Lake Constance. He began development of the engine at NSU Motorenwerke AG, leading to the first running prototype on 1 February 1957. Unlike modern Wankel engines, this 21 horsepower version had both the rotor and housing rotating. His engine design was first licensed by Curtiss-Wright in New Jersey, United States.
On 19 January 1960 the rotary engine was presented for the first time to specialists and the press in a meeting of the German Engineers' Union at the Deutsches Museum in Munich. In the same year, with the KKM 250, the first practical rotary engine was presented in a converted NSU Prinz. At this time the "Wankel engine" became synonymous with the rotary engine, whereas previously it was called the "Motor nach System NSU/Wankel". At the 1963 IAA, the NSU company presented the NSU Wankel-Spider, the first consumer vehicle, which went into production in 1964. Great attention was received by the NSU in August 1967 for the very modern NSU Ro 80, which had a 115-horsepower engine with two rotors. It was the first German car selected as "Car of the Year" in 1968.
In Japan, the manufacturer Mazda solved the engine's chatter marks problem, by reducing apex seals' weight, that made it entering resonating vibrations. The engine has been successfully used by Mazda in several generations of their RX-series of coupés and sedans, including the Mazda Cosmo, R100, the RX-7 and more recently the RX-8. Mercedes-Benz completed its C111 experimental model in 1969 with 3-rotor Wankel engine. In 1970, the next model had a 4-rotor Wankel engine and could reach top speed 290 km/h but never reached serial production.
Wankel became a success in business by securing license agreements around the world. By 1958 Wankel and partners had founded the "Wankel GmbH" company, providing Wankel with a share of the profits for marketing the engine. Among the licensees were Daimler-Benz since 1961, General Motors since 1970, Toyota since 1971, among those who paid higher fees for Wankel RCE rights was a state-owned engineering firm of the DDR. Royalties for the Wankel GmbH for licensure were 40%, later 36%. In 1971 Wankel sold his share of the license royalties for 50 million Deutschmarks to the English conglomerate Lonrho. The year after he got his Technical Development Center back from the Fraunhofer Society.
From 1986 the Felix Wankel Institute cooperated with Daimler Benz AG. D-B provided the operating costs in return for the research rights. He sold the Institute to Daimler Benz for 100 million Marks.
Wankel married Emma "Mi" Kirin in 1936. Though married until death, they had no children.
He never had a driver's license, because he was extremely near-sighted. He was, however, the owner of an NSU Ro 80 with a Wankel engine, which was chauffeured for him.
In 1969, Wankel was granted an honorary Doctorate of Engineering from Technical University Munich. He was known for his championing of animal rights and opposition to the use of animals in testing.
Wankel died in Heidelberg, aged 86. His grave may be found in the Bergfriedhof of Heidelberg.
After his death, the Felix Wankel Foundation sold its real estate property to Volkswagen AG. The Heidelberg Fire Department showcases his last workshop. Wankel's papers are archived in the Technoseum in Mannheim. Furthermore, there is an exhibition "AUTOVISION · Tradition & Forum" in Altlußheim, a permanent showing of over 80 rotary engines and many cars equipped with Wankel motors.

</doc>
<doc id="11359" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11359" title="February 4">
February 4

This day marks the approximate midpoint of winter in the Northern Hemisphere and of summer in the Southern Hemisphere (starting the season at the December solstice).

</doc>
<doc id="11360" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11360" title="February 8">
February 8


</doc>
<doc id="11361" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11361" title="February 9">
February 9


</doc>
<doc id="11362" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11362" title="February 16">
February 16


</doc>
<doc id="11363" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11363" title="February 18">
February 18


</doc>
<doc id="11365" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11365" title="Floor leader">
Floor leader

Floor leaders, also known as a caucus leader, are leaders of their political parties in a body of a legislature.
In the Philippines each body of the bicameral Philippine Congress has a minority floor leader and a majority floor leader. For the Philippine Senate, there is the Majority Floor Leader of the Senate of the Philippines and the Minority Floor Leader of the Senate of the Philippines. For the Philippine House of Representatives there is the Majority Floor Leader of the House of Representatives of the Philippines and the Minority Floor Leader of the House of Representatives of the Philippines. They do not represent political parties but rather political groupings within each body.
In the United States Senate, they are elected by their respective party conferences to serve as the chief Senate spokespeople for their parties and to manage and schedule the legislative and executive business of the Senate. By custom, the Presiding Officer gives the floor leaders priority in obtaining recognition to speak on the floor of the Senate.
In the Senate's two-party system, the floor leaders are the spokespeople from both major parties, elected by their parties. As well serve essentially as executives of their parties within the Senate. The Floor Leaders are referred to as the Senate Majority Leader, who belongs to the party with the most Senators, and the Senate Minority Leader, who belongs to the other major party.
Similar positions exist in the United States House of Representatives, except that role of majority leader normally goes to the second-highest member of the leadership of the majority party, because it traditionally elects its party leader to the position of speaker.

</doc>
<doc id="11366" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11366" title="Fabio Taglioni">
Fabio Taglioni

Fabio Taglioni (September 10, 1920 – July 18, 2001) was an Italian engineer.
Born in Lugo di Romagna, he was chief designer and technical director of Ducati from 1954 until 1989. His desmodromic 90° V-twin engine design is still used in all current Ducati motorcycle engines. Among the many race victories of his early desmo twin, the 1978 legendary return of Mike Hailwood at the Isle of Man is perhaps the most memorable.
After World War II, Taglioni designed engines for Ceccato motorcycles and Mondial before joining Ducati in 1954. He began by designing Ducati's OHC four-stroke singles, and in 1963 designed the prototype V4 Ducati Apollo. This led to the 1972 Ducati 750 Imola Desmo, and the 1970s and 1980s production Ducati L-twin motorcycles.
He died in Bologna in 2001.

</doc>
<doc id="11367" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11367" title="Fourth-generation programming language">
Fourth-generation programming language

A fourth-generation programming language (4GL) is any computer programming language that belongs to a class of languages envisioned as an advancement upon third-generation programming languages (3GL). Each of the programming language generations aims to provide a higher level of abstraction of the internal computer hardware details, making the language more programmer-friendly, powerful, and versatile. While the definition of 4GL has changed over time, it can be typified by operating more with large collections of information at once rather than focusing on just bits and bytes. Languages claimed to be 4GL may include support for database management, report generation, mathematical optimization, GUI development, or web development. Some researchers state that 4GLs are a subset of domain-specific languages.
The concept of 4GL was developed from the 1970s through the 1990s, overlapping most of the development of 3GL, with 4GLs identified as "non-procedural" or "program-generating" languages, contrasted with 3GLs being algorithmic or procedural languages. While 3GLs like C, C++, C#, Java, and JavaScript remain popular for a wide variety of uses, 4GLs as originally defined found uses focused on databases, reports, and websites. Some advanced 3GLs like Python, Ruby, and Perl combine some 4GL abilities within a general-purpose 3GL environment, and libraries with 4GL-like features have been developed as add-ons for most popular 3GLs, producing languages that are a mix of 3GL and 4GL, blurring the distinction.
In the 1980s and 1990s, there were efforts to develop fifth-generation programming languages (5GL).
Though used earlier in papers and discussions, the term 4GL was first used formally by James Martin in his 1981 book "Applications Development Without Programmers" to refer to non-procedural, high-level specification languages. In some primitive way, early 4GLs were included in the Informatics MARK-IV (1967) product and Sperry's MAPPER (1969 internal use, 1979 release).
The motivations for the '4GL' inception and continued interest are several. The term can apply to a large set of software products. It can also apply to an approach that looks for greater semantic properties and implementation power. Just as the 3GL offered greater power to the programmer, so too did the 4GL open up the development environment to a wider population.
The early input scheme for the 4GL supported entry of data within the 72-character limit of the punched card (8 bytes used for sequencing) where a card's tag would identify the type or function. With judicious use of a few cards, the 4GL deck could offer a wide variety of processing and reporting capability whereas the equivalent functionality coded in a 3GL could subsume, perhaps, a whole box or more of cards.
The 72-character format continued for a while as hardware progressed to larger memory and terminal interfaces. Even with its limitations, this approach supported highly sophisticated applications.
As interfaces improved and allowed longer statement lengths and grammar-driven input handling, greater power ensued. An example of this is described on the Nomad page.
The development of the 4GL was influenced by several factors, with the hardware and operating system constraints having a large weight. When the 4GL was first introduced, a disparate mix of hardware and operating systems mandated custom application development support that was specific to the system in order to ensure sales. One example is the MAPPER system developed by Sperry. Though it has roots back to the beginning, the system has proven successful in many applications and has been ported to modern platforms. The latest variant is embedded in the BIS offering of Unisys. MARK-IV is now known as VISION:BUILDER and is offered by Computer Associates.
Santa Fe railroad used MAPPER to develop a system, in a project that was an early example of 4GL, rapid prototyping, and programming by users. The idea was that it was easier to teach railroad experts to use MAPPER than to teach programmers the "intricacies of railroad operations".
One of the early (and portable) languages that had 4GL properties was Ramis developed by Gerald C. Cohen at Mathematica, a mathematical software company. Cohen left Mathematica and founded Information Builders to create a similar reporting-oriented 4GL, called FOCUS.
Later 4GL types are tied to a database system and are far different from the earlier types in their use of techniques and resources that have resulted from the general improvement of computing with time.
An interesting twist to the 4GL scene is realization that graphical interfaces and the related reasoning done by the user form a 'language' that is poorly understood.
A number of different types of 4GLs exist:
Some 4GLs have integrated tools that allow for the easy specification of all the required information:
In the twenty-first century, 4GL systems have emerged as "low code" environments or platforms for the problem of rapid application development in short periods of time. Vendors often provide sample systems such as CRM, contract management, bug tracking from which development can occur with little programming.
Extract data from files or database to create reports in a wide range of formats is done by the report generator tools.

</doc>
<doc id="11369" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11369" title="Frank Capra">
Frank Capra

Frank Russell Capra (born Francesco Rosario Capra; May 18, 1897 – September 3, 1991) was an Italian-American film director, producer and writer who became the creative force behind some of the major award-winning films of the 1930s and 1940s. Born in Italy and raised in Los Angeles from the age of five, his rags-to-riches story has led film historians such as Ian Freer to consider him the "American Dream personified."
Capra became one of America's most influential directors during the 1930s, winning three Academy Awards for Best Director from six nominations, along with three other Oscar wins from nine nominations in other categories. Among his leading films were "It Happened One Night" (1934), "You Can't Take It with You" (1938), and "Mr. Smith Goes to Washington" (1939); Capra was nominated as Best Director and as producer for Academy Award for Best Picture on all three films, winning both awards on the first two. During World War II, Capra served in the U.S. Army Signal Corps and produced propaganda films, such as the "Why We Fight" series.
After World War II, Capra's career declined as his later films, such as "It's a Wonderful Life" (1946), performed poorly when they were first released. In ensuing decades, however, "It's a Wonderful Life" and other Capra films were revisited favorably by critics. Outside of directing, Capra was active in the film industry, engaging in various political and social activities. He served as President of the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences, worked alongside the Writers Guild of America, and was head of the Directors Guild of America.
Capra was born Francesco Rosario Capra in Bisacquino, a village near Palermo, Sicily, Italy. He was the youngest of seven children of Salvatore Capra, a fruit grower, and the former Rosaria "Serah" Nicolosi. Capra's family was Roman Catholic. The name "Capra", notes Capra's biographer Joseph McBride, represents his family's closeness to the land, and means "goat". He notes that the English word "capricious" derives from it, "evoking the animal's skittish temperament", adding that "the name neatly expresses two aspects of Frank Capra's personality: emotionalism and obstinacy."
In 1903, when he was five, Capra emigrated to the United States with his family, who traveled in one of the steerage compartments of the steamship "Germania", which was the cheapest way to book passage. For Capra, the journey, which took 13 days, remained in his mind for the rest of his life as one of his worst experiences:
Capra remembers the ship's arrival in New York Harbor, where he saw "a statue of a great lady, taller than a church steeple, holding a torch above the land we were about to enter". He recalls his father's exclamation at the sight:
The family settled in Los Angeles's East Side (today Chinatown), which Capra described in his autobiography as an Italian "ghetto". Capra's father worked as a fruit picker and young Capra sold newspapers after school for 10 years, until he graduated from high school. Instead of working after graduating, as his parents wanted, he enrolled in college. He worked through college at the California Institute of Technology, playing banjo at nightclubs and taking odd jobs, which included working at the campus laundry facility, waiting tables, and cleaning engines at a local power plant. He studied electrical engineering and graduated in the spring of 1918. Capra later wrote that his college education had "changed his whole viewpoint on life from the viewpoint of an alley rat to the viewpoint of a cultured person".
Soon after graduating from college, Capra was commissioned in the United States Army as a second lieutenant, having completed campus ROTC. In the Army, he taught mathematics to artillerymen at Fort Point, San Francisco. His father died during the war in an accident (1916). In the Army, Capra contracted Spanish flu and was medically discharged to return home to live with his mother. He became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 1920, taking the name Frank Russell Capra. Living at home with his siblings and mother, Capra was the only family member with a college education, yet he was the only one who remained chronically unemployed. After a year without work, seeing how his siblings had steady jobs, he felt he was a failure, which led to bouts of depression and abdominal pains, later discovered to have been an undiagnosed burst appendix.
After recovering at home, Capra moved out and spent the next few years living in flophouses in San Francisco and hopping freight trains, wandering the Western United States. To support himself, he took odd jobs on farms, as a movie extra, playing poker, and selling local oil well stocks.
During this time the 24-year-old Capra directed a 32-minute documentary film titled "La Visita Dell'Incrociatore Italiano Libya a San Francisco". Not only did it document the visit of the Italian naval vessel "Libya" to San Francisco, but also the reception given to the crew of the ship by San Francisco's L'Italia Virtus Club, now known as the San Francisco Italian Athletic Club.
At 25, Capra took a job selling books written and published by American philosopher, Elbert Hubbard. Capra recalled that he "hated being a peasant, being a scrounging new kid trapped in the Sicilian ghetto of Los Angeles. ... All I had was cockiness—and let me tell you that gets you a long way."
During his book sales efforts—and nearly broke—Capra read a newspaper article about a new movie studio opening in San Francisco. Capra phoned them saying he had moved from Hollywood, and falsely implied that he had experience in the budding film industry. Capra's only prior exposure in films was in 1915 while attending Manual Arts High School. The studio's founder, Walter Montague, was nonetheless impressed by Capra and offered him $75 to direct a one-reel silent film. Capra, with the help of a cameraman, made the film in two days and cast it with amateurs.
After that first serious job in films, Capra began efforts to finding similar openings in the film industry. He took a position with another minor San Francisco studio and subsequently received an offer to work with producer Harry Cohn at his new studio in Los Angeles. During this time, he worked as a property man, film cutter, title writer, and assistant director.
Capra later became a gag writer for Hal Roach's "Our Gang" series. He was twice hired as a writer for slapstick comedy director, Mack Sennett, in 1918 and 1924. Under him, Capra wrote scripts for comedian Harry Langdon. According to Capra, it was he who invented Langdon's character, the innocent fool living in a "naughty world."
When Langdon eventually left Sennett to make longer, feature-length movies with First National Studios, he took Capra along as his personal writer and director. They made three feature films together during 1926 and 1927, all of them successful with critics and the public. The films made Langdon a recognized comedian in the caliber of Charlie Chaplin and Buster Keaton. Capra and Langdon later had a falling out, and Capra was fired. During the following years, Langdon's films went into decline without Capra's assistance. After splitting with Langdon, Capra directed a picture for First National, "For the Love of Mike", (1927). This was a silent comedy about three bickering godfathers, a German, a Jew, and an Irishman, starring a budding actress, Claudette Colbert. The movie was considered a failure.
Capra returned to Harry Cohn's studio, now named Columbia Pictures, which was then producing short films and two-reel comedies for "fillers" to play between main features. Columbia was one of many start-up studios on "Poverty Row" in Los Angeles. Like the others, Columbia was unable to compete with larger studios, which often had their own production facilities, distribution, and theaters. Cohn rehired Capra in 1928 to help his studio produce new, full-length feature films, to compete with the major studios. Capra would eventually direct 20 films for Cohn's studio, including all of his classics.
Because of Capra's engineering education, he adapted more easily to the new sound technology than most directors. He welcomed the transition to sound, recalling, "I wasn't at home in silent films." Most studios were unwilling to invest in the new sound technology, assuming it was a passing fad. Many in Hollywood considered sound a threat to the industry and hoped it would pass quickly; McBride notes that "Capra was not one of them." When he saw Al Jolson singing in "The Jazz Singer" in 1927, considered the first talkie, Capra recalled his reaction:
Few of the studio heads or crew were aware of Capra's engineering background until he began directing "The Younger Generation" in 1929. The chief cinematographer who worked with Capra on a number of films was likewise unaware. He describes this early period in sound for film:
During his first year with Columbia, Capra directed nine films, some of which were successful. After the first few, Harry Cohn said: "it was the beginning of Columbia making a better quality of pictures." According to Barson, "Capra became ensconced as Harry Cohn's most trusted director." His films soon established Capra as a "bankable" director known throughout the industry, and Cohn raised Capra's initial salary of $1,000 per film to $25,000 per year. Capra directed a film for MGM during this period, but soon realized he "had much more freedom under Harry Cohn's benevolent dictatorship", where Cohn also put Capra's "name above the title" of his films, a first for the movie industry. Capra wrote of this period and recalled the confidence that Cohn placed in Capra's vision and directing:
Capra directed his first "real" sound picture, "The Younger Generation", in 1929. It was a rags-to-riches romantic comedy about a Jewish family's upward mobility in New York City, with their son later trying to deny his Jewish roots to keep his rich, gentile girlfriend. According to Capra biographer Joseph McBride, Capra "obviously felt a strong identification with the story of a Jewish immigrant who grows up in the ghetto of New York ... and feels he has to deny his ethnic origins to rise to success in America." Capra, however, denied any connection of the story with his own life.
Nonetheless, McBride insists that "The Younger Generation" abounds with parallels to Capra's own life." McBride notes the "devastatingly painful climactic scene", where the young social-climbing son, embarrassed when his wealthy new friends first meet his parents, passes his mother and father off as house servants. That scene, notes McBride, "echoes the shame Capra admitted feeling toward his own family as he rose in social status."
During his years at Columbia, Capra worked often with screenwriter Robert Riskin (husband of Fay Wray), and cameraman Joseph Walker. In many of Capra's films, the wise-cracking and sharp dialogue was often written by Riskin, and he and Capra went on to become Hollywood's "most admired writer-director team."
Capra's films in the 1930s enjoyed immense success at the Academy Awards. "It Happened One Night" (1934) became the first film to win all five top Oscars (Best Picture, Best Director, Best Actor, Best Actress, and Best Adapted Screenplay). Written by Robert Riskin, it is one of the first of the "screwball comedies", and with its release in the Great Depression, critics considered it an escapist story and a variation of the "American Dream". The film established the names of Capra, Columbia Pictures, and stars Clark Gable and Claudette Colbert in the movie industry. The film has been called "picaresque." It was one of the earliest "road movies" and inspired variations on that theme by other filmmakers.
He followed the film with "Broadway Bill" (1934), a screwball comedy about horse racing. The film was a turning point for Capra, however, as he began to conceive an additional dimension to his movies. He started using his films to convey messages to the public. Capra explains his new thinking:
This added goal was inspired after meeting with a Christian Scientist friend who told him to view his talents in a different way:
Capra began to embody messages in subsequent films, many of which conveyed "fantasies of goodwill." The first of those was "Mr. Deeds Goes to Town" (1936), for which Capra won his second Best Director Oscar. Critic Alistair Cooke observed that Capra was "starting to make movies about themes instead of people."
In 1938, Capra won his third Director Oscar in five years for "You Can't Take It with You", which also won Best Picture. In addition to his three directing wins, Capra received directing nominations for three other films ("Lady for a Day", "Mr. Smith Goes to Washington", and "It's a Wonderful Life"). On May 5, 1936, Capra hosted the 8th Academy Awards ceremony.
Although "It's a Wonderful Life" is his best-known film, Friedman notes that it was "Mr. Smith Goes to Washington" (1939), which most represented the "Capra myth." That film expressed Capra's patriotism more than any others, and "presented the individual working within the democratic system to overcome rampant political corruption."
The film, however, became Capra's most controversial. In his research before filming, he was able to stand close to President Franklin D. Roosevelt during a press conference after the recent acts of war by Germany in Europe. Capra recalls his fears:
When the filming was completed, the studio sent preview copies to Washington. Joseph P. Kennedy Sr., U.S. ambassador to the UK, wrote to Columbia head Harry Cohn, "Please do not play this picture in Europe." Politicians were concerned about the potential negative effect the film might have on the morale of the United States' allies, as World War II had begun. Kennedy wrote to President Roosevelt that, "In foreign countries this film must inevitably strengthen the mistaken impression that the United States is full of graft, corruption and lawlessness." Many studio heads agreed, nor did they want negative feelings about Hollywood instilled in political leaders.
Nonetheless, Capra's vision of the film's significance was clear:
Capra pleaded with Cohn to allow the film to go into distribution and remembers the intensity of their decision making:
Cohn and Capra chose to ignore the negative publicity and demands and released the film as planned. It was later nominated for 11 Academy Awards, only winning one (for Best Original Story) partly because of the number of major pictures that were nominated that year was 10, including "The Wizard of Oz" and "Gone with the Wind". Hollywood columnist Louella Parsons called it a "smash patriotic hit" and most critics agreed, seeing that audiences left the theaters with "an enthusiasm for democracy" and "in a glow of patriotism."
The significance of the film's message was established further in France, shortly after World War II began. When the French public was asked to select which film they wanted to see most, having been told by the Vichy government that soon no more American films would be allowed in France, the overwhelming majority chose it over all others. To a France soon to be invaded and occupied by Nazi forces, the film most expressed the "perseverance of democracy and the American way."
In 1941 Capra directed "Meet John Doe" (1941), which some consider Capra's most controversial movie. The film's hero, played by Gary Cooper, is a former baseball player now bumming around, lacking goals. He is selected by a news reporter to represent the "common man," to capture the imagination of ordinary Americans. The film was released shortly before America became involved in World War II, and citizens were still in an isolationist mood. According to some historians, the film was made to convey a "deliberate reaffirmation of American values," though ones that seemed uncertain with respect to the future.
Film author Richard Glazer speculates that the film may have been autobiographical, "reflecting Capra's own uncertainties." Glazer describes how, "John's accidental transformation from drifter to national figure parallels Capra's own early drifting experience and subsequent involvement in movie making ... "Meet John Doe", then, was an attempt to work out his own fears and questions."
Within four days after the Japanese Attack on Pearl Harbor on December 7, 1941, Capra quit his successful directing career in Hollywood and received a commission as a major in the United States Army. He also gave up his presidency of the Screen Directors Guild. Being 44 years of age, he was not asked to enlist, but, notes Friedman, "Capra had an intense desire to prove his patriotism to his adopted land."
Capra recalls some personal reasons for enlisting:
During the next four years of World War II, Capra's job was to head a special section on morale to explain to soldiers "why the hell they're in uniform", writes Capra, and were not "propaganda" films like those created by the Nazis and Japan. Capra directed or co-directed seven documentary war information films.
Capra was assigned to work directly under Chief of Staff George C. Marshall, the most senior officer in command of the Army, who later created the Marshall Plan and was awarded a Nobel Peace Prize. Marshall chose to bypass the usual documentary film-making department, Signal Corps, because he felt they were not capable of producing "sensitive and objective troop information films." One colonel explained the importance of these future films to Capra:
During his first meeting with General Marshall, Capra was told his mission:
The films included the seven-episode "Why We Fight" series – consisting of "Prelude to War" (1942), "The Nazis Strike" (1942), "Divide and Conquer" (1943), "The Battle of Britain" (1943), "The Battle of Russia" (1943), "The Battle of China" (1944), "War Comes to America" (1945) – plus "" (1945), "Here Is Germany" (1945), "Tunisian Victory" (1945), and "Two Down and One to Go" (1945) that do not bear the "Why We Fight" banner; as well as the African-American related film, "The Negro Soldier" (1944).
After he completed the first few documentaries, government officials and U.S. Army staff felt they were powerful messages and excellent presentations of why it was necessary for the United States to fight in the war. All footage came from military and government sources, whereas during earlier years, many newsreels secretly used footage from enemy sources. Animated charts were created by Walt Disney and his animators. A number of Hollywood composers wrote the background music, including Alfred Newman and Russian-born composer Dimitri Tiomkin. After the first complete film was viewed by General Marshall along with U.S. Army staff, Marshall approached Capra: "Colonel Capra, how did you do it? That is a most wonderful thing."
Officials made efforts to see that the films were seen in theaters throughout the U.S. They were translated into French, Spanish, Portuguese, and Chinese for use by other countries. Winston Churchill ordered that "all" of them be shown to the British public in theaters. They are today often broadcast on television and used as a teaching aid.
The "Why We Fight" series is widely considered a masterpiece of war information documentaries, and won an Academy Award. "Prelude to War" won the 1942 Academy Award for Best Documentary Feature. When his career ended, Capra regarded these films as his most important works. As a colonel, he received the Legion of Merit in 1943 and the Distinguished Service Medal in 1945.
After the war ended, along with directors William Wyler and George Stevens, Capra founded Liberty Films. Their studio became the first independent company of directors since United Artists in 1919 whose goal was to make films without interference by studio bosses. However, the only pictures completed by the studio were "It's a Wonderful Life" (1946) and "State of the Union" (1948). The first of these was a box office disappointment but was nominated for five Academy Awards.
While the film did not resonate with audiences in 1946, its popularity has grown through the years. In 1998, the American Film Institute (AFI) named it one of the best films ever made, putting it at 11th on AFI's 100 Years...100 Movies list of the top American films of all time. In 2006, the AFI put the film at the top of its AFI's 100 Years...100 Cheers list, ranking what AFI considers the most inspirational American movies of all time. It would become Capra's last film to win major acclaim—his successful years were now behind him, although he directed five more films over the next 14 years.
For "State of the Union" (1948), Capra changed studios. It would be the only time he ever worked for Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer. Although the project had an excellent pedigree with stars Spencer Tracy and Katharine Hepburn, the film was not a success, and Capra's statement, "I think "State of the Union" was my most perfect film in handling people and ideas" has few adherents today.
In January 1952, the U.S. Ambassador to India asked Capra to represent the U.S. film industry at an International Film Festival to be held in India. A State Department friend of Capra asked him and explained why his trip would be important:
After two weeks in India, Capra discovered that Bowles' fears were warranted, as many film sessions were used by Russian and Chinese representatives to give long political speeches. At a lunch with 15 Indian directors and producers, he stressed that "they must preserve freedom as artists, and that any government control would hinder that freedom. A totalitarian system—and they would become nothing but publicity men for the party in power." Capra had a difficult time communicating this, however, as he noted in his diary:
When he returned to Washington to give his report, Secretary of State Dean Acheson gave Capra his commendation for "virtually single-handedly forestalling a possible Communist take-over of Indian films." Ambassador Bowles also conveyed gratitude to Capra for "one helluva job."
Following "It's a Wonderful Life" and "State of the Union," which were done soon after the war ended, Capra's themes were becoming out of step with changes in the film industry and the public mood. Friedman finds that while Capra's ideas were popular with depression-era and prewar audiences, they became less relevant to a prospering post-war America. Capra had become "disconnected from an American culture that had changed" during the previous decade. Biographer Joseph McBride argues that Capra's disillusionment was more related to the negative effect that the House Un-American Activities Committee (HUAC) had on the film industry in general. The HUAC interrogations in the early 1950s ended many Hollywood careers. Capra himself was not called to testify, although he was a prime target of the committee due to his past associations with many Hollywood blacklisted screenwriters.
Capra blamed his early retirement from films on the rising power of stars, which forced him to continually compromise his artistic vision. He also claimed that increasing budgetary and scheduling demands had constrained his creative abilities. Film historian Michael Medved agreed with Capra, noting that he walked away from the movie business because "he refused to adjust to the cynicism of the new order." In his autobiography, written in 1971, Capra expressed his feelings about the shifting film industry:
Capra added that in his opinion, "practically all the Hollywood film-making of today is stooping to cheap salacious pornography in a crazy bastardization of a great art to compete for the 'patronage' of deviates and masturbators."
Capra remained employable in Hollywood during and after the HUAC hearings but chose nonetheless to demonstrate his loyalty by attempting to re-enlist in the Army at the outbreak of the Korean War, in 1950. He was rejected due to his age. He was later invited to join the Defense Department's newly formed Think Tank project, VISTA, but was denied the necessary clearance. According to Friedman, "these two rejections were devastating to the man who had made a career of demonstrating American ideals in film", along with his directing award-winning documentary films for the Army.
Capra directed two films at Paramount Pictures starring Bing Crosby, "Riding High" (1950) and "Here Comes the Groom" (1951). By 1952, at the age of 55, Capra effectively retired from Hollywood filmmaking; he shifted to working with the California Institute of Technology, his alma mater, to produce educational films on science topics.
From 1952 to 1956, Capra produced four science-related television specials in color for The Bell System Science Series: "Our Mr. Sun" (1956), "Hemo the Magnificent" (1957), "The Strange Case of the Cosmic Rays" (1957), and "Meteora: The Unchained Goddess" (1958). These educational science documentaries were popular favorites for school science classrooms. It was eight years before he directed another theatrical film, "A Hole in the Head" (1959) with Frank Sinatra and Edward G. Robinson, his first feature film in color. His final theatrical film was with Glenn Ford and Bette Davis, named "Pocketful of Miracles" (1961), a remake of his 1933 film "Lady for a Day". In the mid-1960s he worked on pre-production for an adaptation of Martin Caidin's novel "Marooned," but budgetary constraints caused him to eventually shelve it.
Capra's final film, "Rendezvous in Space" (1964), was an industrial film made for the Martin Marietta Company and shown at the 1964 New York World's Fair. It was exhibited at the New York Hall of Science after the Fair ended.
Capra's directing style relied on improvisation to a great extent. He was noted for going on the set with no more than the master scenes written. He explained his reasoning:
According to some experts, Capra used great, unobtrusive craftsmanship when directing, and felt it was bad directing to distract the audience with fancy technical gimmicks. Film historian and author William S. Pechter described Capra's style as one "of almost classical purity." He adds that his style relied on editing to help his films sustain a "sequence of rhythmic motion." Pechter describes its effect:
Film critic John Raeburn discusses an early Capra film, "American Madness" (1932), as an example of how he had mastered the movie medium and expressed a unique style:
As for Capra's subject matter, film author Richard Griffith tries to summarize Capra's common theme:
Capra's personality when directing gave him a reputation for "fierce independence" when dealing with studio bosses. On the set he was said to be gentle and considerate, "a director who displays absolutely no exhibitionism." As Capra's films often carry a message about basic goodness in human nature, and show the value of unselfishness and hard work, his wholesome, feel-good themes have led some cynics to term his style "Capra-corn." However, those who hold his vision in higher regard prefer the term "Capraesque".
Capra's basic themes of championing the common man, as well as his use of spontaneous, fast-paced dialogue and goofy, memorable lead and supporting characters, made him one of the most popular and respected filmmakers of the 20th century. His influence can be traced in the works of many directors, including Robert Altman, Ron Howard, Masaki Kobayashi, Akira Kurosawa, John Lasseter, David Lynch, John Milius, Martin Scorsese, Steven Spielberg, Oliver Stone and François Truffaut
Capra married actress Helen Howell in 1923. They divorced in 1928. He married Lucille Warner in 1932, with whom he had a daughter and three sons, one of whom died in infancy.
Capra was four times president of the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences and three times president of the Directors Guild of America, which he helped found. Under his presidency, he worked to give directors more artistic control of their films. During his career as a director, he retained an early ambition to teach science, and after his career declined in the 1950s, he made educational television films related to science subjects.
Physically, Capra was short, stocky, and vigorous, and enjoyed outdoor activities such as hunting, fishing, and mountain climbing. In his later years, he spent time writing short stories and songs, along with playing guitar. He collected fine and rare books during the 1930s and 1940s. Six hundred and forty items from his "distinguished library" were sold by Parke-Bernet Galleries at auction in New York in April 1949, realizing $68,000 ($ today).
His son Frank Capra Jr. was the president of EUE Screen Gems Studios in Wilmington, North Carolina, until his death on December 19, 2007. His grandsons, brothers Frank Capra III and Jonathan Capra, have both worked as assistant directors; Frank III worked on the 1995 film "The American President", which referred to Frank Capra in the film's dialogue.
Capra's political views coalesced in his movies, which promoted and celebrated the spirit of American individualism. A conservative Republican, Capra railed against Franklin D. Roosevelt during his tenure as governor of New York and opposed his presidency during the years of the Depression. Capra stood against government intervention during the national economic crisis.
In his later years, Capra became a self-described pacifist and was very critical of the Vietnam War.
Capra wrote in his early adulthood that he was a "Christmas Catholic".
In his later years, Capra returned to the Catholic Church and described himself as "a Catholic in spirit; one who firmly believes that the anti-moral, the intellectual bigots, and the Mafias of ill will may destroy religion, but they will never conquer the cross".
In 1985, aged 88, Capra suffered one of a series of strokes. He died in La Quinta, California, of a heart attack in his sleep in 1991 at the age of 94. He was interred at Coachella Valley Public Cemetery in Coachella, California.
He left part of his ranch in Fallbrook, California, to the California Institute of Technology, to be used as a retreat center. Capra's personal papers and some film related materials are contained in the Wesleyan University Cinema Archives, which allows scholars and media experts full access.
During the golden age of Hollywood, Capra's "fantasies of goodwill" made him one of the two or three most famous and successful directors in the world. Film historian Ian Freer notes that at the time of his death in 1991, his legacy remained intact:
Director/actor John Cassavetes contemplating Capra's contribution to film quipped: "Maybe there really wasn't an America, it was only Frank Capra." Capra's films were his love letters to an idealized America—a cinematic landscape of his own invention. The performances his actors gave were invariable portrayals of personalities developed into recognizable images of popular culture, "their acting has the bold simplicity of an icon ..."
Like his contemporary, director John Ford, Capra defined and aggrandized the tropes of mythic America where individual courage invariably triumphs over collective evil. Film historian Richard Griffith speaks of Capra's "... reliance on sentimental conversation and the ultimate benevolence of ordinary America to resolve all deep conflicts." "Average America" is visualized as "... a tree-lined street, undistinguished frame houses surrounded by modest areas of grass, a few automobiles. For certain purposes, it assumed that all "real "Americans live in towns like this, and so great is the power of myth, even the born city-dweller is likely to believe vaguely that he too lives on this shady street, or comes from it, or is going to."
NYU professor Leonard Quart writes:
Although Capra's stature as a director had declined in the 1950s, his films underwent a revival in the 1960s:
French film historian John Raeburn, editor of "Cahiers du cinéma", noted that Capra's films were unknown in France, but there too his films underwent a fresh discovery by the public. He believes the reason for his renewed popularity had to do with his themes, which he made credible "an ideal conception of an American national character":
In 1982, the American Film Institute honored Capra by giving him their AFI Life Achievement Award. The event was used to create the television film, "The American Film Institute Salute to Frank Capra", hosted by James Stewart. In 1986, Capra received the National Medal of Arts. During his acceptance speech for the AFI award, Capra stressed his most important values:
Capra expanded on his visions in his 1971 autobiography, "The Name Above the Title":
The "Why We Fight" series earned Capra the Legion of Merit in 1943 and the Distinguished Service Medal in 1945.
In 1957, Capra was awarded the George Eastman Award, given by George Eastman House for distinguished contribution to the art of film.
Los Angeles Mayor Sam Yorty, by a vote of the city council, declared May 12, 1962 as "Frank Capra Day." George Sidney, President of the Directors Guild stated that "This is the first time in the history of Hollywood, that the city of Los Angeles has officially recognized a creative talent." At the event ceremony, director John Ford announced that Capra had also received an honorary Order of the British Empire (OBE) on the recommendation of Winston Churchill. Ford suggested publicly to Capra:
In 1966, Capra was awarded the Distinguished Alumni Award from his alma mater Caltech. (see section "Early Life", supra)
In 1974, Capra was awarded the Inkpot Award.
In 1975, Capra was awarded the Golden Anchor Award by the U.S Naval Reserve's Combat Camera Group for his contribution to World War II Naval photography and production of the "Why We Fight" series. The award ceremony included a video salute by President Ford. Attending were many of Capra's favorite actors including Jimmy Stewart, Donna Reed, Pat O'Brien, Jean Arthur, and others.
An annual "It's a Wonderful Life" celebration that Capra attended in 1981, during which he said, "This is one of the proudest moments of my life," was recounted in "The New Yorker".
He was nominated six times for Best Director and seven times for Outstanding Production/Best Picture. Out of six nominations for Best Director, Capra received the award three times. He briefly held the record for winning the most Best Director Oscars when he won for the third time in 1938, until this record was matched by John Ford in 1941, and then later surpassed by Ford in 1952. William Wyler also matched this record upon winning his third Oscar in 1959.
The Academy Film Archive has preserved two of Capra's films, "The Matinee Idol" (1928) and "Two Down and One to Go!" (1945).

</doc>
<doc id="11370" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11370" title="FIFA World Cup">
FIFA World Cup

The FIFA World Cup, often simply called the World Cup, is an international association football competition contested by the senior men's national teams of the members of the "" (FIFA), the sport's global governing body. The championship has been awarded every four years since the inaugural tournament in 1930, except in 1942 and 1946 when it was not held because of the Second World War. The current champion is France, which won its second title at the 2018 tournament in Russia.
The current format involves a qualification phase, which takes place over the preceding three years, to determine which teams qualify for the tournament phase. In the tournament phase, 32 teams, including the automatically qualifying host nation(s), compete for the title at venues within the host nation(s) over about a month.
The 21 World Cup tournaments have been won by eight national teams. Brazil have won five times, and they are the only team to have played in every tournament. The other World Cup winners are Germany and Italy, with four titles each; Argentina, France, and inaugural winner Uruguay, with two titles each; and England and Spain, with one title each.
The World Cup is the most prestigious association football tournament in the world, as well as the most widely viewed and followed sporting event in the world, exceeding even the Olympic Games. The cumulative viewership of all matches of the 2006 World Cup was estimated to be 26.29 billion with an estimated 715.1 million people watching the final match, a ninth of the entire population of the planet.
17 countries have hosted the World Cup. Brazil, France, Italy, Germany, and Mexico have each hosted twice, while Uruguay, Switzerland, Sweden, Chile, England, Argentina, Spain, the United States, Japan and South Korea (jointly), South Africa, and Russia have each hosted once. Qatar will host the 2022 tournament, and 2026 will be jointly hosted by Canada, the United States, and Mexico, which will give Mexico the distinction of being the first country to host games in three World Cups.
The world's first international football match was a challenge match played in Glasgow in 1872 between Scotland and England, which ended in a 0–0 draw. The first international tournament, the inaugural British Home Championship, took place in 1884. As football grew in popularity in other parts of the world at the start of the 20th century, it was held as a demonstration sport with no medals awarded at the 1900 and 1904 Summer Olympics (however, the International Olympic Committee has retroactively upgraded their status to official events), and at the 1906 Intercalated Games.
After FIFA was founded in 1904, it tried to arrange an international football tournament between nations outside the Olympic framework in Switzerland in 1906. These were very early days for international football, and the official history of FIFA describes the competition as having been a failure.
At the 1908 Summer Olympics in London, football became an official competition. Planned by The Football Association (FA), England's football governing body, the event was for amateur players only and was regarded suspiciously as a show rather than a competition. Great Britain (represented by the England national amateur football team) won the gold medals. They repeated the feat at the 1912 Summer Olympics in Stockholm.
With the Olympic event continuing to be contested only between amateur teams, Sir Thomas Lipton organised the Sir Thomas Lipton Trophy tournament in Turin in 1909. The Lipton tournament was a championship between individual clubs (not national teams) from different nations, each one of which represented an entire nation. The competition is sometimes described as "The First World Cup", and featured the most prestigious professional club sides from Italy, Germany and Switzerland, but the FA of England refused to be associated with the competition and declined the offer to send a professional team. Lipton invited West Auckland, an amateur side from County Durham, to represent England instead. West Auckland won the tournament and returned in 1911 to successfully defend their title.
In 1914, FIFA agreed to recognise the Olympic tournament as a "world football championship for amateurs", and took responsibility for managing the event. This paved the way for the world's first intercontinental football competition, at the 1920 Summer Olympics, contested by Egypt and 13 European teams, and won by Belgium. Uruguay won the next two Olympic football tournaments in 1924 and 1928. Those were also the first two open world championships, as 1924 was the start of FIFA's professional era.
Due to the success of the Olympic football tournaments, FIFA, with President Jules Rimet as the driving force, again started looking at staging its own international tournament outside of the Olympics. On 28 May 1928, the FIFA Congress in Amsterdam decided to stage a world championship itself. With Uruguay now two-time official football world champions and to celebrate their centenary of independence in 1930, FIFA named Uruguay as the host country of the inaugural World Cup tournament.
The national associations of selected nations were invited to send a team, but the choice of Uruguay as a venue for the competition meant a long and costly trip across the Atlantic Ocean for European sides. Indeed, no European country pledged to send a team until two months before the start of the competition. Rimet eventually persuaded teams from Belgium, France, Romania, and Yugoslavia to make the trip. In total, 13 nations took part: seven from South America, four from Europe, and two from North America.
The first two World Cup matches took place simultaneously on 13 July 1930, and were won by France and the US, who defeated Mexico 4–1 and Belgium 3–0 respectively. The first goal in World Cup history was scored by Lucien Laurent of France. In the final, Uruguay defeated Argentina 4–2 in front of 93,000 people in Montevideo, and became the first nation to win the World Cup. After the creation of the World Cup, FIFA and the IOC disagreed over the status of amateur players, and so football was dropped from the 1932 Summer Olympics. Olympic football returned at the 1936 Summer Olympics, but was now overshadowed by the more prestigious World Cup.
The issues facing the early World Cup tournaments were the difficulties of intercontinental travel, and war. Few South American teams were willing to travel to Europe for the 1934 World Cup and all North and South American nations except Brazil and Cuba boycotted the 1938 tournament. Brazil was the only South American team to compete in both. The 1942 and 1946 competitions, which Germany and Brazil sought to host, were cancelled due to World War II and its aftermath.
The 1950 World Cup, held in Brazil, was the first to include British participants. British teams withdrew from FIFA in 1920, partly out of unwillingness to play against the countries they had been at war with, and partly as a protest against foreign influence on football, but rejoined in 1946 following FIFA's invitation. The tournament also saw the return of 1930 champions Uruguay, who had boycotted the previous two World Cups. Uruguay won the tournament again after defeating the host nation Brazil, in the match called "Maracanazo" (Portuguese: "Maracanaço").
In the tournaments between 1934 and 1978, 16 teams competed in each tournament, except in 1938, when Austria was absorbed into Germany after qualifying, leaving the tournament with 15 teams, and in 1950, when India, Scotland, and Turkey withdrew, leaving the tournament with 13 teams. Most of the participating nations were from Europe and South America, with a small minority from North America, Africa, Asia, and Oceania. These teams were usually defeated easily by the European and South American teams. Until 1982, the only teams from outside Europe and South America to advance out of the first round were: USA, semi-finalists in 1930; Cuba, quarter-finalists in 1938; North Korea, quarter-finalists in 1966; and Mexico, quarter-finalists in 1970.
The tournament was expanded to 24 teams in 1982, and then to 32 in 1998, also allowing more teams from Africa, Asia and North America to take part. Since then, teams from these regions have enjoyed more success, with several having reached the quarter-finals: Mexico, quarter-finalists in 1986; Cameroon, quarter-finalists in 1990; South Korea, finishing in fourth place in 2002; Senegal, along with USA, both quarter-finalists in 2002; Ghana, quarter-finalists in 2010; and Costa Rica, quarter-finalists in 2014. Nevertheless, European and South American teams continue to dominate, e.g., the quarter-finalists in 1994, 1998, 2006 and 2018 were all from Europe or South America and so were the finalists of all tournaments so far.
Two hundred teams entered the 2002 FIFA World Cup qualification rounds; 198 nations attempted to qualify for the 2006 FIFA World Cup, while a record 204 countries entered qualification for the 2010 FIFA World Cup.
In October 2013, Sepp Blatter spoke of guaranteeing the Caribbean Football Union's region a position in the World Cup. In the edition of 25 October 2013 of the "FIFA Weekly" Blatter wrote that: "From a purely sporting perspective, I would like to see globalisation finally taken seriously, and the African and Asian national associations accorded the status they deserve at the FIFA World Cup. It cannot be that the European and South American confederations lay claim to the majority of the berths at the World Cup." Those two remarks suggested to commentators that Blatter could be putting himself forward for re-election to the FIFA Presidency.
Following the magazine's publication, Blatter's would-be opponent for the FIFA Presidency, UEFA President Michel Platini, responded that he intended to extend the World Cup to 40 national associations, increasing the number of participants by eight. Platini said that he would allocate an additional berth to UEFA, two each to the Asian Football Confederation and the Confederation of African Football, two shared between CONCACAF and CONMEBOL, and a guaranteed place for the Oceania Football Confederation. Platini was clear about why he wanted to expand the World Cup. He said: "[The World Cup is] not based on the quality of the teams because you don't have the best 32 at the World Cup ... but it's a good compromise. ... It's a political matter so why not have more Africans? The competition is to bring all the people of all the world. If you don't give the possibility to participate, they don't improve."
In October 2016, FIFA president Gianni Infantino stated his support for a 48-team World Cup in 2026. On 10 January 2017, FIFA confirmed the 2026 World Cup will have 48 finalist teams.
By May 2015, the games were under a particularly dark cloud because of the 2015 FIFA corruption case, allegations and criminal charges of bribery, fraud and money laundering to corrupt the issuing of media and marketing rights (rigged bids) for FIFA games, with FIFA officials accused of taking bribes totaling more than $150 million over 24 years. In late May, the US Department of Justice announced a 47-count indictment with charges of racketeering, wire fraud and money laundering conspiracy against 14 people. Arrests of over a dozen FIFA officials were made since that time, particularly on 29 May and 3 December. By the end of May 2015, a total of nine FIFA officials and five executives of sports and broadcasting markets had already been charged on corruption. At the time, FIFA president Sepp Blatter announced he would relinquish his position in February 2016.
On 4 June 2015 Chuck Blazer while co-operating with the FBI and the Swiss authorities admitted that he and the other members of FIFA's then-executive committee were bribed in order to promote the 1998 and 2010 World Cups. On 10 June 2015 Swiss authorities seized computer data from the offices of Sepp Blatter. The same day, FIFA postponed the bidding process for the 2026 FIFA World Cup in light of the allegations surrounding bribery in the awarding of the 2018 and 2022 tournaments. Then-secretary general Jérôme Valcke stated, "Due to the situation, I think it's nonsense to start any bidding process for the time being." On 28 October 2015, Blatter and FIFA VP Michel Platini, a potential candidate for presidency, were suspended for 90 days; both maintained their innocence in statements made to the news media.
On 3 December 2015 two FIFA vice-presidents were arrested on suspicion of bribery in the same Zurich hotel where seven FIFA officials had been arrested in May. An additional 16 indictments by the US Department of Justice were announced on the same day.
An equivalent tournament for women's football, the FIFA Women's World Cup, was first held in 1991 in China. The women's tournament is smaller in scale and profile than the men's, but is growing; the number of entrants for the 2007 tournament was 120, more than double that of 1991.
Men's football has been included in every Summer Olympic Games except 1896 and 1932. Unlike many other sports, the men's football tournament at the Olympics is not a top-level tournament, and since 1992, an under-23 tournament with each team allowed three over-age players. Women's football made its Olympic debut in 1996.
The FIFA Confederations Cup was a tournament held one year before the World Cup at the World Cup host nation(s) as a dress rehearsal for the upcoming World Cup. It is contested by the winners of each of the six FIFA confederation championships, along with the FIFA World Cup champion and the host country. The first edition took place in 1992 and the last edition was played in 2017. In March 2019, FIFA confirmed that the tournament would no longer be active owing to an expansion of the FIFA Club World Cup in 2021.
FIFA also organises international tournaments for youth football (FIFA U-20 World Cup, FIFA U-17 World Cup, FIFA U-20 Women's World Cup, FIFA U-17 Women's World Cup), club football (FIFA Club World Cup), and football variants such as futsal (FIFA Futsal World Cup) and beach soccer (FIFA Beach Soccer World Cup). The latter three do not have a women's version, although a FIFA Women's Club World Cup has been proposed.
The FIFA U-20 Women's World Cup is held the year before each Women's World Cup and both tournaments are awarded in a single bidding process. The U-20 tournament serves as a dress rehearsal for the larger competition.
From 1930 to 1970, the "Jules Rimet Trophy" was awarded to the World Cup winning team. It was originally simply known as the "World Cup" or "Coupe du Monde", but in 1946 it was renamed after the FIFA president Jules Rimet who set up the first tournament. In 1970, Brazil's third victory in the tournament entitled them to keep the trophy permanently. However, the trophy was stolen in 1983 and has never been recovered, apparently melted down by the thieves.
After 1970, a new trophy, known as the FIFA World Cup Trophy, was designed. The experts of FIFA, coming from seven countries, evaluated the 53 presented models, finally opting for the work of the Italian designer Silvio Gazzaniga. The new trophy is high, made of solid 18 carat (75%) gold and weighs . The base contains two layers of semi-precious malachite while the bottom side of the trophy bears the engraved year and name of each FIFA World Cup winner since 1974. The description of the trophy by Gazzaniga was: "The lines spring out from the base, rising in spirals, stretching out to receive the world. From the remarkable dynamic tensions of the compact body of the sculpture rise the figures of two athletes at the stirring moment of victory."
This new trophy is not awarded to the winning nation permanently. World Cup winners retain the trophy only until the post-match celebration is finished. They are awarded a gold-plated replica rather than the solid gold original immediately afterwards.
Currently, all members (players, coaches, and managers) of the top three teams receive medals with an insignia of the World Cup Trophy; winners' (gold), runners-up' (silver), and third-place (bronze). In the 2002 edition, fourth-place medals were awarded to hosts South Korea. Before the 1978 tournament, medals were only awarded to the eleven players on the pitch at the end of the final and the third-place match. In November 2007, FIFA announced that all members of World Cup-winning squads between 1930 and 1974 were to be retroactively awarded winners' medals.
Since 2006, winners of the competition are also awarded the right to wear the FIFA Champions Badge, up until the time at which the winner of the next competition is decided.
Since the second World Cup in 1934, qualifying tournaments have been held to thin the field for the final tournament. They are held within the six FIFA continental zones (Africa, Asia, North and Central America and Caribbean, South America, Oceania, and Europe), overseen by their respective confederations. For each tournament, FIFA decides the number of places awarded to each of the continental zones beforehand, generally based on the relative strength of the confederations' teams.
The qualification process can start as early as almost three years before the final tournament and last over a two-year period. The formats of the qualification tournaments differ between confederations. Usually, one or two places are awarded to winners of intercontinental play-offs. For example, the winner of the Oceanian zone and the fifth-placed team from the Asian zone entered a play-off for a spot in the 2010 World Cup. From the 1938 World Cup onwards, host nations receive automatic qualification to the final tournament. This right was also granted to the defending champions between 1938 and 2002, but was withdrawn from the 2006 FIFA World Cup onward, requiring the champions to qualify. Brazil, winners in 2002, were the first defending champions to play qualifying matches.
The current final tournament has been used since 1998 and features 32 national teams competing over the course of a month in the host nation(s). There are two stages: the group stage followed by the knockout stage.
In the group stage, teams compete within eight groups of four teams each. Eight teams are seeded, including the hosts, with the other seeded teams selected using a formula based on the FIFA World Rankings and/or performances in recent World Cups, and drawn to separate groups. The other teams are assigned to different "pots", usually based on geographical criteria, and teams in each pot are drawn at random to the eight groups. Since 1998, constraints have been applied to the draw to ensure that no group contains more than two European teams or more than one team from any other confederation.
Each group plays a round-robin tournament, in which each team is scheduled for three matches against other teams in the same group. This means that a total of six matches are played within a group. The last round of matches of each group is scheduled at the same time to preserve fairness among all four teams. The top two teams from each group advance to the knockout stage. Points are used to rank the teams within a group. Since 1994, three points have been awarded for a win, one for a draw and none for a loss (before, winners received two points).
If one considers all possible outcomes (win, draw, loss) for all six matches in a group, there are 729 (= 3) outcome combinations possible. However, 207 of these combinations lead to ties between the second and third places. In such case, the ranking among these teams is determined as follows:
The knockout stage is a single-elimination tournament in which teams play each other in one-off matches, with extra time and penalty shootouts used to decide the winner if necessary. It begins with the round of 16 (or the second round) in which the winner of each group plays against the runner-up of another group. This is followed by the quarter-finals, the semi-finals, the third-place match (contested by the losing semi-finalists), and the final.
On 10 January 2017, FIFA approved a new format, the 48-team World Cup (to accommodate more teams), which consists of 16 groups of three teams each, with two teams qualifying from each group, to form a round of 32 knockout stage, to be implemented by 2026.
Early World Cups were given to countries at meetings of FIFA's congress. The locations were controversial because South America and Europe were by far the two centres of strength in football and travel between them required three weeks by boat. The decision to hold the first World Cup in Uruguay, for example, led to only four European nations competing. The next two World Cups were both held in Europe. The decision to hold the second of these in France was disputed, as the South American countries understood that the location would alternate between the two continents. Both Argentina and Uruguay thus boycotted the 1938 FIFA World Cup.
Since the 1958 FIFA World Cup, to avoid future boycotts or controversy, FIFA began a pattern of alternating the hosts between the Americas and Europe, which continued until the 1998 FIFA World Cup. The 2002 FIFA World Cup, hosted jointly by South Korea and Japan, was the first one held in Asia, and the first tournament with multiple hosts. South Africa became the first African nation to host the World Cup in 2010. The 2014 FIFA World Cup was hosted by Brazil, the first held in South America since Argentina 1978, and was the first occasion where consecutive World Cups were held outside Europe.
The host country is now chosen in a vote by FIFA's Council. This is done under an exhaustive ballot system. The national football association of a country desiring to host the event receives a "Hosting Agreement" from FIFA, which explains the steps and requirements that are expected from a strong bid. The bidding association also receives a form, the submission of which represents the official confirmation of the candidacy. After this, a FIFA designated group of inspectors visit the country to identify that the country meets the requirements needed to host the event and a report on the country is produced. The decision on who will host the World Cup is usually made six or seven years in advance of the tournament. However, there have been occasions where the hosts of multiple future tournaments were announced at the same time, as was the case for the 2018 and 2022 World Cups, which were awarded to Russia and Qatar, with Qatar becoming the first Middle Eastern country to host the tournament.
For the 2010 and 2014 World Cups, the final tournament is rotated between confederations, allowing only countries from the chosen confederation (Africa in 2010, South America in 2014) to bid to host the tournament. The rotation policy was introduced after the controversy surrounding Germany's victory over South Africa in the vote to host the 2006 tournament. However, the policy of continental rotation will not continue beyond 2014, so any country, except those belonging to confederations that hosted the two preceding tournaments, can apply as hosts for World Cups starting from 2018. This is partly to avoid a similar scenario to the bidding process for the 2014 tournament, where Brazil was the only official bidder.
The 2026 FIFA World Cup was chosen to be held in the United States, Canada and Mexico, marking the first time a World Cup has been shared by three host nations. The 2026 tournament will be the biggest World Cup ever held, with 48 teams playing 80 matches. Sixty matches will take place in the US, including all matches from the quarter-finals onward, while Canada and Mexico will host 10 games each.
Six of the eight champions have won one of their titles while playing in their own homeland, the exceptions being Brazil, who finished as runners-up after losing the deciding match on home soil in 1950 and lost their semi-final against Germany in 2014, and Spain, which reached the second round on home soil in 1982. England (1966) won its only title while playing as a host nation. Uruguay (1930), Italy (1934), Argentina (1978), and 
France (1998) won their first titles as host nations but have gone on to win again, while Germany (1974) won their second title on home soil.
Other nations have also been successful when hosting the tournament. Switzerland (quarter-finals 1954), Sweden (runners-up in 1958), Chile (third place in 1962), South Korea (fourth place in 2002), and Mexico (quarter-finals in 1970 and 1986) all have their best results when serving as hosts. So far, South Africa (2010) has been the only host nation to fail to advance beyond the first round.
 The best-attended single match, shown in the last three columns, has been the final in 11 of the 21 World Cups . Another match or matches drew more attendance than the final in 1930, 1938, 1958, 1962, 1970–1982, 1990, and 2006.
 
The World Cup was first televised in 1954 and is now the most widely viewed and followed sporting event in the world. The cumulative viewership of all matches of the 2006 World Cup is estimated to be 26.29 billion. 715.1 million individuals watched the final match of this tournament (a ninth of the entire population of the planet). The 2006 World Cup draw, which decided the distribution of teams into groups, was watched by 300 million viewers. The World Cup attracts many sponsors such as Coca-Cola, McDonald's and Adidas. For these companies and many more, being a sponsor strongly impacts their global brands. Host countries typically experience a multimillion-dollar revenue increase from the month-long event.
The governing body of the sport, FIFA, generated $4.8 billion in revenue from the 2014 tournament, and $6.1 billion from the 2018 tournament.
Each FIFA World Cup since 1966 has its own mascot or logo. "World Cup Willie", the mascot for the 1966 competition, was the first World Cup mascot. World Cups feature official match balls specially designed for each tournament. Each World Cup also has an official song, which have been performed by artists ranging from Shakira to Will Smith. Other songs, such as “Nessun dorma”, performed by The Three Tenors at four World Cup concerts, have also become identified with the tournament.
Forming a partnership with FIFA in 1970, Panini published its first sticker album for the 1970 World Cup. Since then, collecting and trading stickers and cards has become part of the World Cup experience, especially for the younger generation. FIFA has also licensed World Cup video games since 1986, with Electronic Arts the current license holder.
The World Cup even has a statistically significant effect on birth rates, the male/female sex ratio of newborns, and heart attacks in nations whose national teams are competing.
In all, 79 nations have played in at least one World Cup. Of these, eight national teams have won the World Cup, and they have added stars to their badges, with each star representing a World Cup victory. (Uruguay, however, choose to display four stars on their badge, representing their two gold medals at the 1924 and 1928 Summer Olympics and their two World Cup titles in 1930 and 1950).
With five titles, Brazil are the most successful World Cup team and also the only nation to have played in every World Cup (21) to date. Brazil were also the first team to win the World Cup for the third (1970), fourth (1994) and fifth (2002) time. Italy (1934 and 1938) and Brazil (1958 and 1962) are the only nations to have won consecutive titles. West Germany (1982–1990) and Brazil (1994–2002) are the only nations to appear in three consecutive World Cup finals. Germany has made the most top-four finishes (13), medals (12), as well as the most finals (8).
To date, the final of the World Cup has only been contested by teams from the UEFA (Europe) and CONMEBOL (South America) confederations. European nations have won twelve titles, while South American have won nine. Only two teams from outside these two continents have ever reached the semi-finals of the competition: United States (North, Central America and Caribbean) in 1930 and South Korea (Asia) in 2002. The best result of an African team is reaching the quarter-finals: Cameroon in 1990, Senegal in 2002, and Ghana in 2010. Only one Oceanian qualifier, Australia in 2006, has advanced to the second round.
Brazil, Argentina, Spain and Germany are the only teams to win a World Cup outside their continental confederation; Brazil came out victorious in Europe (1958), North America (1970 and 1994) and Asia (2002). Argentina won a World Cup in North America in 1986, while Spain won in Africa in 2010. In 2014, Germany became the first European team to win in the Americas. Only on five occasions have consecutive World Cups been won by teams from the same continent, and currently it is the first time with four champions in a row from the same continental confederation. Italy and Brazil successfully defended their titles in 1938 and 1962 respectively, while Italy's triumph in 2006 has been followed by wins for Spain in 2010, Germany in 2014 and France in 2018. Currently, it is also the first time that one of the currently winning continents (Europe) is ahead of the other (South America) by more than one championship.
At the end of each World Cup, awards are presented to the players and teams for accomplishments other than their final team positions in the tournament. There are currently six awards:
An "All-Star Team" consisting of the best players of the tournament has also been announced for each tournament since 1998.
Three players share the record for playing in the most World Cups; Mexico's Antonio Carbajal (1950–1966) and Rafael Márquez (2002–2018); and Germany's Lothar Matthäus (1982–1998) all played in five tournaments. Matthäus has played the most World Cup matches overall, with 25 appearances. Brazil's Djalma Santos (1954–1962), West Germany's Franz Beckenbauer (1966–1974), and Germany's Philipp Lahm (2006–2014) are the only players to be named to three World Cup All-Star Teams.
Miroslav Klose of Germany (2002–2014) is the all-time top scorer at the World Cup with 16 goals. He broke Ronaldo of Brazil's record of 15 goals (1998–2006) during the 2014 semi-final match against Brazil. West Germany's Gerd Müller (1970–1974) is third, with 14 goals. The fourth-placed goalscorer, France's Just Fontaine, holds the record for the most goals scored in a single World Cup; all his 13 goals were scored in the 1958 tournament.
In November 2007, FIFA announced that all members of World Cup-winning squads between 1930 and 1974 were to be retroactively awarded winners' medals. This made Brazil's Pelé the only player to have won three World Cup winners' medals (1958, 1962, and 1970, although he did not play in the 1962 final due to injury), with 20 other players who have won two winners' medals. Seven players have collected all three types of World Cup medals (winners', runner- ups', and third-place); five players were from West Germany's squad of 1966–1974 including Franz Beckenbauer, Jürgen Grabowski, Horst-Dieter Höttges, Sepp Maier, and Wolfgang Overath (1966–1974), Italy's Franco Baresi (1982, 1990, 1994) and the most recent has been Miroslav Klose of Germany (2002–2014) with four consecutive medals.
Brazil's Mário Zagallo, West Germany's Franz Beckenbauer and France's Didier Deschamps are the only people to date to win the World Cup as both player and head coach. Zagallo won in 1958 and 1962 as a player and in 1970 as head coach. Beckenbauer won in 1974 as captain and in 1990 as head coach, and Deschamps repeated the feat in 2018, after having won in 1998 as captain. Italy's Vittorio Pozzo is the only head coach to ever win two World Cups (1934 and 1938). All World Cup-winning head coaches were natives of the country they coached to victory.
Among the national teams, Germany and Brazil have played the most World Cup matches (109), Germany appeared in the most finals (8), semi-finals (13), and quarter-finals (16), while Brazil has appeared in the most World Cups (21), has the most wins (73) and has scored the most goals (229). The two teams have played each other twice in the World Cup, in the 2002 final and in the 2014 semi-final.

</doc>
<doc id="11371" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11371" title="Quintus Fabius Maximus Verrucosus">
Quintus Fabius Maximus Verrucosus

Quintus Fabius Maximus Verrucosus, surnamed Cunctator ( 280 – 203 BC), was a Roman statesman and general of the third century BC. He was consul five times (233, 228, 215, 214, and 209 BC) and was appointed dictator in 221 and 217 BC. He was censor in 230 BC. His agnomen, "Cunctator", usually translated as "the delayer", refers to the strategy that he employed against Hannibal's forces during the Second Punic War. Facing an outstanding commander with superior numbers, he pursued a then-novel strategy of targeting the enemy's supply lines, and accepting only smaller engagements on favourable ground, rather than risking his entire army on direct confrontation with Hannibal himself. As a result, he is regarded as the originator of many tactics used in guerrilla warfare.
Born at Rome c. 280 BC, Fabius was a descendant of the ancient patrician Fabia gens. He was the son or grandson of Quintus Fabius Maximus Gurges, three times consul and "princeps senatus", and grandson or great-grandson of Quintus Fabius Maximus Rullianus, a hero of the Samnite Wars, who like Verrucosus held five consulships, as well as the offices of dictator and censor. Many earlier ancestors had also been consuls. His cognomen, "Verrucosus", or "warty", used to distinguish him from other members of his family, derived from a wart on his upper lip.
According to Plutarch, Fabius possessed a mild temper and slowness in speaking. As a child, he had difficulties in learning, engaged in sports with other children cautiously and appeared submissive in his interactions with others. All the above were perceived by those who knew him superficially to be signs of inferiority. However, according to Plutarch, these traits proceeded from stability, greatness of mind, and lion-likeness of temper. By the time he reached adulthood and was roused by active life, his virtues exerted themselves; consequently, his lack of energy displayed during his earlier years was revealed as a result of a lack of passion and his slowness was recognised as a sign of prudence and firmness.
While still a youth in 265 BC, Fabius was consecrated an augur. It is unknown whether he participated in the First Punic War, fought between the Roman Republic and Carthage from 264 to 241 BC, or what his role might have been. Fabius' political career began in the years following that war. He was probably quaestor in 237 or 236 BC, and curule aedile about 235. During his first consulship, in 233 BC, Fabius was awarded a triumph for his victory over the Ligurians, whom he defeated and drove into the Alps. He was censor in 230, then consul a second time in 228. It is possible that he held the office of dictator for a first time around this time: according to Livy, Fabius's tenure of the dictatorship in 217 was his second term in that office, with Gaius Flaminius as his deputy and magister equitum during the first term: however Plutarch suggests that Flaminius was deputy instead to Marcus Minucius Rufus - presumably Fabius's great political rival of that name, who later served as deputy to Fabius himself (see below). It is of course possible that Flaminius was successively deputy to both, after Minucius's apparently premature deposition following bad augural omens: and also possible that little of note (other than, possibly, holding elections during the absence of consuls) was accomplished during either dictatorship.
According to Livy, in 218 BC Fabius took part in an embassy to Carthage, sent to demand redress for the capture of the supposedly neutral town of Saguntum in Spain. After the delegation had received the Carthaginians' reply, it was Fabius himself who, addressing the Carthaginian senate, issued a formal declaration of war between Carthage and the Roman Republic. However, Cassius Dio, followed by Zonaras, calls the ambassador "Marcus Fabius", suggesting that it was his cousin, Marcus Fabius Buteo, who issued the declaration of war against the Carthaginians.
When the Consul Gaius Flaminius was killed during the disastrous Roman defeat at the Battle of Lake Trasimene in 217 BC, panic swept Rome. With Consular armies destroyed in two major battles, and Hannibal approaching Rome's gates, the Romans feared the imminent destruction of their city. The Roman Senate decided to appoint a dictator, and chose Fabius for the role - possibly for the second time, though evidence of a previous term seems to be conflicting - in part due to his advanced age and experience. However, he was not allowed to appoint his own magister equitum; instead, the Romans chose a political enemy, Marcus Minucius. Then Fabius quickly sought to calm the Roman people by asserting himself as a strong Dictator at the moment of what was perceived to be the worst crisis in Roman history. He asked the Senate to allow him to ride on horseback, which Dictators were never allowed to do. He then caused himself to be accompanied by the full complement of twenty-four lictors, and ordered the surviving Consul, Gnaeus Servilius Geminus, to dismiss his lictors (in essence, acknowledging the seniority of the dictator), and to present himself before Fabius as a private citizen.
Plutarch tells us that Fabius believed that the disaster at Lake Trasimene was due, in part, to the fact that the gods had become neglected. Before that battle, a series of omens had been witnessed, including a series of lightning bolts, which Fabius had believed were warnings from the gods. He had warned Flaminius of this, but Flaminius had ignored the warnings. And so Fabius, as Dictator, next sought to please the gods. He ordered a massive sacrifice of the whole product of the next harvest season throughout Italy, in particular that of cows, goats, swine, and sheep. In addition, he ordered that musical festivities be celebrated, and then told his fellow citizens to each spend a precise sum of 333 sestertii and 333 denarii. Plutarch isn't sure exactly how Fabius came up with this number, although he believes it was to honor the perfection of the number three, as it is the first of the odd numbers, and one of the first of the prime numbers. It is not known if Fabius truly believed that these actions had won the gods over to the Roman side, although the actions probably did (as intended) convince the average Roman that the gods had finally been won over.
Fabius respected Hannibal's military skill and so refused to meet him in a pitched battle. Instead, he kept his troops close to Hannibal, hoping to exhaust him in a long war of attrition. Fabius was able to harass the Carthaginian foraging parties, limiting Hannibal's ability to wreak destruction, while conserving his own military force. The delaying tactics involved not directly engaging Hannibal, while also exercising a "scorched earth" practice to prevent Hannibal's forces from obtaining grain and other resources. 
The Romans were unimpressed with this defensive strategy and at first gave Fabius his epithet Cunctator (delayer) as an insult. The strategy was in part ruined because of a lack of unity in the command of the Roman army, since Fabius' Master of the Horse, Minucius, was a political enemy of Fabius. At one point, Fabius was called by the priests to assist with certain sacrifices, and as such, Fabius left the command of the army in the hands of Minucius during his absence. Fabius had told Minucius not to attack Hannibal in his absence, but Minucius disobeyed and attacked anyway. The attack, though of no strategic value, resulted in the retreat of several enemy units, and so the Roman people, desperate for good news, believed Minucius to be a hero. On hearing of this, Fabius became enraged, and, as Dictator, could have ordered Minucius' execution for his disobedience. One of the Plebeian Tribunes (chief representatives of the people) for the year, Metilius, was a partisan of Minucius, and as such he sought to use his power to help Minucius. The Plebeian Tribunes were the only magistrates independent of the Dictator, and so with his protection, Minucius was relatively safe. Plutarch states that Metilius "boldly applied himself to the people in the behalf of Minucius", and had Minucius granted powers equivalent to those of Fabius. By this, Plutarch probably means that as a Plebeian Tribune, Metilius had the Plebeian Council, a popular assembly which only Tribunes could preside over, grant Minucius quasi-dictatorial powers.
Fabius did not attempt to fight the promotion of Minucius, but rather decided to wait until Minucius' rashness caused him to run headlong into some disaster. He realized what would happen when Minucius was defeated in battle by Hannibal. Fabius, we are told, reminded Minucius that it was Hannibal, and not he, who was the enemy. Minucius proposed that they share the joint control of the army, with command rotating between the two every other day. Fabius rejected this, and instead let Minucius command half of the army, while he commanded the other half. Minucius openly claimed that Fabius was cowardly because he failed to confront the Carthaginian forces. Near the present-day town of Larino in the Molise (then called Larinum), Hannibal had taken up position in a town called Gerione. In the valley between Larino and Gerione, Minucius decided to make a broad frontal attack on Hannibal's troops. Several thousand men were involved on either side. It appeared that the Roman troops were winning, but Hannibal had set a trap. Soon the Roman troops were being slaughtered. Upon seeing the ambush of Minucius' army, Fabius cried "O Hercules! how much sooner than I expected, though later than he seemed to desire, hath Minucius destroyed himself!" On ordering his army to join the battle and rescue their fellow Romans, Fabius exclaimed "We must make haste to rescue Minucius, who is a valiant man, and a lover of his country."
Fabius rushed to his co-commander's assistance and Hannibal's forces immediately retreated. After the battle, there was some feeling that there would be conflict between Minucius and Fabius; however, the younger soldier marched his men to Fabius' encampment and is reported to have said, "My father gave me life. Today you saved my life. You are my second father. I recognize your superior abilities as a commander." When Fabius' term as Dictator ended, consular government was restored, and Gnaeus Servilius Geminus and Marcus Atilius Regulus assumed the consulship for the remainder of the year.
The once looked down upon tactics employed by Fabius came then to be respected. It is said, asserts Plutarch, that even Hannibal acknowledged and feared the Fabian strategy and the Roman inexhaustible manpower. After Fabius lured him away from Apulia into the Bruttian territory and then proceeded to besiege Tarentum by treachery in 209 BC, Hannibal commented, "It seems that the Romans have found another Hannibal, for we have lost Tarentum in the same way that we took it."
Shortly after Fabius had laid down his dictatorship, Gaius Terentius Varro and Lucius Aemilius Paullus were elected as consuls. They rallied the people through the assemblies, and won their support for Varro's plan to abandon Fabius' strategy, and engage Hannibal directly. Varro's rashness did not surprise Fabius, but when Fabius learned of the size of the army (eighty-eight thousand soldiers) that Varro had raised, he became quite concerned. Unlike the losses that had been suffered by Minucius, a major loss by Varro had the potential to kill so many soldiers that Rome might have had no further resources with which to continue the war. Fabius had warned the other consul for the year, Aemilius Paullus, to make sure that Varro remained unable to directly engage Hannibal. According to Plutarch, Paullus replied to Fabius that he feared the votes in Rome more than Hannibal's army.
When word reached Rome of the disastrous Roman defeat under Varro and Paullus at the Battle of Cannae in 216 BC, the Senate and the People of Rome turned to Fabius for guidance. They had believed his strategy to be flawed before, but now they thought him to be as wise as the gods. He walked the streets of Rome, assured as to eventual Roman victory, in an attempt to comfort his fellow Romans. Without his support, the senate might have remained too frightened to even meet. He placed guards at the gates of the city to stop the frightened Romans from fleeing, and regulated mourning activities. He set times and places for this mourning, and ordered that each family perform such observances within their own private walls, and that the mourning should be complete within a month; following the completion of these mourning rituals, the entire city was purified of its blood-guilt in the deaths. Although he did not again hold the office of dictator - and indeed, it was granted to others over him - he might as well have been one unofficially at this time, because whatever measures he proposed were immediately adopted with little or no further debate.
"Cunctator" became an honorific title, and his delaying tactic was followed in Italy for the rest of the war. Fabius' own military success was small, aside from the reconquest of Tarentum in 209 BC. For this victory, Plutarch tells us, he was awarded a second triumph that was even more splendid than the first. When Marcus Livius Macatus, the governor of Tarentum, claimed the merit of recovering the town, Fabius rejoined, "Certainly, had you not lost it, I would have never retaken it." After serving as Dictator, he served as a Consul twice more (in 215 BC and 214 BC), and for a fifth time in 209 BC. He was also Chief Augur (at a very young age) and Pontifex, but never Pontifex Maximus according to Gaius Stern (citing Livy on Fabius). The holding of seats in the two highest colleges was not repeated until either Julius Caesar or possibly Sulla.
In the senate, he opposed the young and ambitious Scipio Africanus, who wanted to carry the war to Africa. Fabius continued to argue that confronting Hannibal directly was too dangerous. Scipio planned to take Roman forces to Carthage itself and force Hannibal to return to Africa to defend the city. Scipio was eventually given limited approval, despite continuous opposition from Fabius, who blocked levies and restricted Scipio's access to troops. Fabius wished to ensure that sufficient forces remained to defend Roman territory if Scipio was defeated. Fabius became gravely ill and died in 203 BC, shortly after Hannibal's army left Italy, and before the eventual Roman victory over Hannibal at the Battle of Zama won by Scipio.
Part of his eulogy is preserved on a fragment, which praised his delaying strategy in his altercations with Hannibal during the Second Punic War. The inscription reads as follows: "...[as censor] he conducted the first revision of the senate membership and held committal elections in the consulship of Marcus Junius Pera and Marcus Barbula; he besieged and recaptured Tarentum and the strong-hold of Hannibal, and [obtained enormous booty?]; he won surpassing glory by his military [exploits?]." 
Later, he became a legendary figure and the model of a tough, courageous Roman, and was bestowed the honorific title, "The Shield of Rome" (similar to Marcus Claudius Marcellus being named the "Sword of Rome"). According to Ennius, "unus homo nobis cunctando restituit rem" – "one man, by delaying, restored the state to us." Virgil, in the Aeneid, has Aeneas' father Anchises mention Fabius Maximus while in Hades as the greatest of the many great Fabii, quoting the same line. While Hannibal is mentioned in the company of history's greatest generals, military professionals have bestowed Fabius' name on an entire strategic doctrine known as "Fabian strategy", and George Washington has been called "the American Fabius." Mikhail Kutuzov has likewise been called "the Russian Fabius" for his strategy against Napoleon.
According to its own ancient legend, the Roman princely family of Massimo descends from Fabius Maximus.

</doc>
<doc id="11376" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11376" title="Floating-point arithmetic">
Floating-point arithmetic

In computing, floating-point arithmetic (FP) is arithmetic using formulaic representation of real numbers as an approximation to support a trade-off between range and precision. For this reason, floating-point computation is often found in systems which include very small and very large real numbers, which require fast processing times. A number is, in general, represented approximately to a fixed number of significant digits (the significand) and scaled using an exponent in some fixed base; the base for the scaling is normally two, ten, or sixteen. A number that can be represented exactly is of the following form:
where significand is an integer, base is an integer greater than or equal to two, and exponent is also an integer.
For example:
The term "floating point" refers to the fact that a number's radix point ("decimal point", or, more commonly in computers, "binary point") can "float"; that is, it can be placed anywhere relative to the significant digits of the number. This position is indicated as the exponent component, and thus the floating-point representation can be thought of as a kind of scientific notation.
A floating-point system can be used to represent, with a fixed number of digits, numbers of different orders of magnitude: e.g. the distance between galaxies or the diameter of an atomic nucleus can be expressed with the same unit of length. The result of this dynamic range is that the numbers that can be represented are not uniformly spaced; the difference between two consecutive representable numbers varies with the chosen scale.
Over the years, a variety of floating-point representations have been used in computers. In 1985, the IEEE 754 Standard for Floating-Point Arithmetic was established, and since the 1990s, the most commonly encountered representations are those defined by the IEEE.
The speed of floating-point operations, commonly measured in terms of FLOPS, is an important characteristic of a computer system, especially for applications that involve intensive mathematical calculations.
A floating-point unit (FPU, colloquially a math coprocessor) is a part of a computer system specially designed to carry out operations on floating-point numbers.
A number representation specifies some way of encoding a number, usually as a string of digits.
There are several mechanisms by which strings of digits can represent numbers. In common mathematical notation, the digit string can be of any length, and the location of the radix point is indicated by placing an explicit "point" character (dot or comma) there. If the radix point is not specified, then the string implicitly represents an integer and the unstated radix point would be off the right-hand end of the string, next to the least significant digit. In fixed-point systems, a position in the string is specified for the radix point. So a fixed-point scheme might be to use a string of 8 decimal digits with the decimal point in the middle, whereby "00012345" would represent 0001.2345.
In scientific notation, the given number is scaled by a power of 10, so that it lies within a certain range—typically between 1 and 10, with the radix point appearing immediately after the first digit. The scaling factor, as a power of ten, is then indicated separately at the end of the number. For example, the orbital period of Jupiter's moon Io is seconds, a value that would be represented in standard-form scientific notation as seconds.
Floating-point representation is similar in concept to scientific notation. Logically, a floating-point number consists of:
To derive the value of the floating-point number, the "significand" is multiplied by the "base" raised to the power of the "exponent", equivalent to shifting the radix point from its implied position by a number of places equal to the value of the exponent—to the right if the exponent is positive or to the left if the exponent is negative.
Using base-10 (the familiar decimal notation) as an example, the number , which has ten decimal digits of precision, is represented as the significand together with 5 as the exponent. To determine the actual value, a decimal point is placed after the first digit of the significand and the result is multiplied by to give , or . In storing such a number, the base (10) need not be stored, since it will be the same for the entire range of supported numbers, and can thus be inferred.
Symbolically, this final value is:
where is the significand (ignoring any implied decimal point), is the precision (the number of digits in the significand), is the base (in our example, this is the number "ten"), and is the exponent.
Historically, several number bases have been used for representing floating-point numbers, with base two (binary) being the most common, followed by base ten (decimal floating point), and other less common varieties, such as base sixteen (hexadecimal floating point), base eight (octal floating point), base four (quaternary floating point), base three (balanced ternary floating point) and even base 256 and base .
A floating-point number is a rational number, because it can be represented as one integer divided by another; for example is (145/100)×1000 or /100. The base determines the fractions that can be represented; for instance, 1/5 cannot be represented exactly as a floating-point number using a binary base, but 1/5 can be represented exactly using a decimal base (, or ). However, 1/3 cannot be represented exactly by either binary (0.010101...) or decimal (0.333...), but in base 3, it is trivial (0.1 or 1×3) . The occasions on which infinite expansions occur depend on the base and its prime factors.
The way in which the significand (including its sign) and exponent are stored in a computer is implementation-dependent. The common IEEE formats are described in detail later and elsewhere, but as an example, in the binary single-precision (32-bit) floating-point representation, formula_4, and so the significand is a string of 24 bits. For instance, the number π's first 33 bits are:
In this binary expansion, let us denote the positions from 0 (leftmost bit, or most significant bit) to 32 (rightmost bit). The 24-bit significand will stop at position 23, shown as the underlined bit above. The next bit, at position 24, is called the "round bit" or "rounding bit". It is used to round the 33-bit approximation to the nearest 24-bit number (there are specific rules for halfway values, which is not the case here). This bit, which is in this example, is added to the integer formed by the leftmost 24 bits, yielding:
When this is stored in memory using the IEEE 754 encoding, this becomes the significand . The significand is assumed to have a binary point to the right of the leftmost bit. So, the binary representation of π is calculated from left-to-right as follows:
where is the precision ( in this example), is the position of the bit of the significand from the left (starting at and finishing at here) and is the exponent ( in this example).
It can be required that the most significant digit of the significand of a non-zero number be non-zero (except when the corresponding exponent would be smaller than the minimum one). This process is called "normalization". For binary formats (which uses only the digits and ), this non-zero digit is necessarily . Therefore, it does not need to be represented in memory; allowing the format to have one more bit of precision. This rule is variously called the "leading bit convention", the "implicit bit convention", the "hidden bit convention", or the "assumed bit convention".
The floating-point representation is by far the most common way of representing in computers an approximation to real numbers. However, there are alternatives:
In 1914, Leonardo Torres y Quevedo designed an electro-mechanical version of Charles Babbage's Analytical Engine, and included floating-point arithmetic.
In 1938, Konrad Zuse of Berlin completed the Z1, the first binary, programmable mechanical computer; it uses a 24-bit binary floating-point number representation with a 7-bit signed exponent, a 17-bit significand (including one implicit bit), and a sign bit. The more reliable relay-based Z3, completed in 1941, has representations for both positive and negative infinities; in particular, it implements defined operations with infinity, such as formula_11, and it stops on undefined operations, such as formula_12.
Zuse also proposed, but did not complete, carefully rounded floating-point arithmetic that includes formula_13 and NaN representations, anticipating features of the IEEE Standard by four decades. In contrast, von Neumann recommended against floating-point numbers for the 1951 IAS machine, arguing that fixed-point arithmetic is preferable.
The first "commercial" computer with floating-point hardware was Zuse's Z4 computer, designed in 1942–1945. In 1946, Bell Laboratories introduced the Mark V, which implemented decimal floating-point numbers.
The Pilot ACE has binary floating-point arithmetic, and it became operational in 1950 at National Physical Laboratory, UK. Thirty-three were later sold commercially as the English Electric DEUCE. The arithmetic is actually implemented in software, but with a one megahertz clock rate, the speed of floating-point and fixed-point operations in this machine were initially faster than those of many competing computers.
The mass-produced IBM 704 followed in 1954; it introduced the use of a biased exponent. For many decades after that, floating-point hardware was typically an optional feature, and computers that had it were said to be "scientific computers", or to have "scientific computation" (SC) capability (see also Extensions for Scientific Computation (XSC)). It was not until the launch of the Intel i486 in 1989 that "general-purpose" personal computers had floating-point capability in hardware as a standard feature.
The UNIVAC 1100/2200 series, introduced in 1962, supported two floating-point representations:
The IBM 7094, also introduced in 1962, supports single-precision and double-precision representations, but with no relation to the UNIVAC's representations. Indeed, in 1964, IBM introduced hexadecimal floating-point representations in its System/360 mainframes; these same representations are still available for use in modern z/Architecture systems. However, in 1998, IBM included IEEE-compatible binary floating-point arithmetic to its mainframes; in 2005, IBM also added IEEE-compatible decimal floating-point arithmetic.
Initially, computers used many different representations for floating-point numbers. The lack of standardization at the mainframe level was an ongoing problem by the early 1970s for those writing and maintaining higher-level source code; these manufacturer floating-point standards differed in the word sizes, the representations, and the rounding behavior and general accuracy of operations. Floating-point compatibility across multiple computing systems was in desperate need of standardization by the early 1980s, leading to the creation of the IEEE 754 standard once the 32-bit (or 64-bit) word had become commonplace. This standard was significantly based on a proposal from Intel, which was designing the i8087 numerical coprocessor; Motorola, which was designing the 68000 around the same time, gave significant input as well.
In 1989, mathematician and computer scientist William Kahan was honored with the Turing Award for being the primary architect behind this proposal; he was aided by his student (Jerome Coonen) and a visiting professor (Harold Stone).
Among the x86 innovations are these:
A floating-point number consists of two fixed-point components, whose range depends exclusively on the number of bits or digits in their representation. Whereas components linearly depend on their range, the floating-point range linearly depends on the significand range and exponentially on the range of exponent component, which attaches outstandingly wider range to the number.
On a typical computer system, a "double-precision" (64-bit) binary floating-point number has a coefficient of 53 bits (including 1 implied bit), an exponent of 11 bits, and 1 sign bit. Since 2 = 1024, the complete range of the positive normal floating-point numbers in this format is from 2 ≈ 2 × 10 to approximately 2 ≈ 2 × 10.
The number of normalized floating-point numbers in a system ("B", "P", "L", "U") where
is formula_14.
There is a smallest positive normalized floating-point number,
which has a 1 as the leading digit and 0 for the remaining digits of the significand, and the smallest possible value for the exponent.
There is a largest floating-point number,
which has "B" − 1 as the value for each digit of the significand and the largest possible value for the exponent.
In addition, there are representable values strictly between −UFL and UFL. Namely, positive and negative zeros, as well as denormalized numbers.
The IEEE standardized the computer representation for binary floating-point numbers in IEEE 754 (a.k.a. IEC 60559) in 1985. This first standard is followed by almost all modern machines. It was revised in 2008. IBM mainframes support IBM's own hexadecimal floating point format and IEEE 754-2008 decimal floating point in addition to the IEEE 754 binary format. The Cray T90 series had an IEEE version, but the SV1 still uses Cray floating-point format.
The standard provides for many closely related formats, differing in only a few details. Five of these formats are called "basic formats", and others are termed "extended precision formats" and "extendable precision format". Three formats are especially widely used in computer hardware and languages:
Increasing the precision of the floating-point representation generally reduces the amount of accumulated round-off error caused by intermediate calculations.
Less common IEEE formats include:
Any integer with absolute value less than 2 can be exactly represented in the single precision format, and any integer with absolute value less than 2 can be exactly represented in the double precision format. Furthermore, a wide range of powers of 2 times such a number can be represented. These properties are sometimes used for purely integer data, to get 53-bit integers on platforms that have double precision floats but only 32-bit integers.
The standard specifies some special values, and their representation: positive infinity (+∞), negative infinity (−∞), a negative zero (−0) distinct from ordinary ("positive") zero, and "not a number" values (NaNs).
Comparison of floating-point numbers, as defined by the IEEE standard, is a bit different from usual integer comparison. Negative and positive zero compare equal, and every NaN compares unequal to every value, including itself. All values except NaN are strictly smaller than +∞ and strictly greater than −∞. Finite floating-point numbers are ordered in the same way as their values (in the set of real numbers).
Floating-point numbers are typically packed into a computer datum as the sign bit, the exponent field, and the significand or mantissa, from left to right. For the IEEE 754 binary formats (basic and extended) which have extant hardware implementations, they are apportioned as follows:
While the exponent can be positive or negative, in binary formats it is stored as an unsigned number that has a fixed "bias" added to it. Values of all 0s in this field are reserved for the zeros and subnormal numbers; values of all 1s are reserved for the infinities and NaNs. The exponent range for normalized numbers is [−126, 127] for single precision, [−1022, 1023] for double, or [−16382, 16383] for quad. Normalized numbers exclude subnormal values, zeros, infinities, and NaNs.
In the IEEE binary interchange formats the leading 1 bit of a normalized significand is not actually stored in the computer datum. It is called the "hidden" or "implicit" bit. Because of this, single precision format actually has a significand with 24 bits of precision, double precision format has 53, and quad has 113.
For example, it was shown above that π, rounded to 24 bits of precision, has:
The sum of the exponent bias (127) and the exponent (1) is 128, so this is represented in single precision format as
An example of a layout for 32-bit floating point is
and the 64 bit layout is similar.
In the IEEE 754 standard, zero is signed, meaning that there exist both a "positive zero" (+0) and a "negative zero" (−0). In most run-time environments, positive zero is usually printed as "0" and the negative zero as "-0". The two values behave as equal in numerical comparisons, but some operations return different results for +0 and −0. For instance, 1/(−0) returns negative infinity, while 1/+0 returns positive infinity (so that the identity 1/(1/±∞) = ±∞ is maintained). Other common functions with a discontinuity at "x"=0 which might treat +0 and −0 differently include log("x"), signum("x"), and the principal square root of for any negative number "y". As with any approximation scheme, operations involving "negative zero" can occasionally cause confusion. For example, in IEEE 754, "x" = "y" does not always imply 1/"x" = 1/"y", as 0 = −0 but 1/0 ≠ 1/−0.
Subnormal values fill the underflow gap with values where the absolute distance between them is the same as for adjacent values just outside the underflow gap.
This is an improvement over the older practice to just have zero in the underflow gap, and where underflowing results were replaced by zero (flush to zero).
Modern floating-point hardware usually handles subnormal values (as well as normal values), and does not require software emulation for subnormals.
The infinities of the extended real number line can be represented in IEEE floating-point datatypes, just like ordinary floating-point values like 1, 1.5, etc.
They are not error values in any way, though they are often (but not always, as it depends on the rounding) used as replacement values when there is an overflow. Upon a divide-by-zero exception, a positive or negative infinity is returned as an exact result. An infinity can also be introduced as a numeral (like C's "INFINITY" macro, or "∞" if the programming language allows that syntax).
IEEE 754 requires infinities to be handled in a reasonable way, such as
IEEE 754 specifies a special value called "Not a Number" (NaN) to be returned as the result of certain "invalid" operations, such as 0/0, ∞×0, or sqrt(−1). In general, NaNs will be propagated i.e. most operations involving a NaN will result in a NaN, although functions that would give some defined result for any given floating-point value will do so for NaNs as well, e.g. NaN ^ 0 = 1. There are two kinds of NaNs: the default "quiet" NaNs and, optionally, "signaling" NaNs. A signaling NaN in any arithmetic operation (including numerical comparisons) will cause an "invalid operation" to be signaled.
The representation of NaNs specified by the standard has some unspecified bits that could be used to encode the type or source of error; but there is no standard for that encoding. In theory, signaling NaNs could be used by a runtime system to flag uninitialized variables, or extend the floating-point numbers with other special values without slowing down the computations with ordinary values, although such extensions are not common.
It is a common misconception that the more esoteric features of the IEEE 754 standard discussed here, such as extended formats, NaN, infinities, subnormals etc., are only of interest to numerical analysts, or for advanced numerical applications; in fact the opposite is true: these features are designed to give safe robust defaults for numerically unsophisticated programmers, in addition to supporting sophisticated numerical libraries by experts. The key designer of IEEE 754, William Kahan notes that it is incorrect to "... [deem] features of IEEE Standard 754 for Binary Floating-Point Arithmetic that ...[are] not appreciated to be features usable by none but numerical experts. The facts are quite the opposite. In 1977 those features were designed into the Intel 8087 to serve the widest possible market... Error-analysis tells us how to design floating-point arithmetic, like IEEE Standard 754, moderately tolerant of well-meaning ignorance among programmers".
In addition to the widely used IEEE 754 standard formats, other floating-point formats are used, or have been used, in certain domain-specific areas.
By their nature, all numbers expressed in floating-point format are rational numbers with a terminating expansion in the relevant base (for example, a terminating decimal expansion in base-10, or a terminating binary expansion in base-2). Irrational numbers, such as π or √2, or non-terminating rational numbers, must be approximated. The number of digits (or bits) of precision also limits the set of rational numbers that can be represented exactly. For example, the decimal number 123456789 cannot be exactly represented if only eight decimal digits of precision are available (would be rounded to 123456790 or 123456780 where the rightmost digit 0 is not explicitly represented).
When a number is represented in some format (such as a character string) which is not a native floating-point representation supported in a computer implementation, then it will require a conversion before it can be used in that implementation. If the number can be represented exactly in the floating-point format then the conversion is exact. If there is not an exact representation then the conversion requires a choice of which floating-point number to use to represent the original value. The representation chosen will have a different value from the original, and the value thus adjusted is called the "rounded value".
Whether or not a rational number has a terminating expansion depends on the base. For example, in base-10 the number 1/2 has a terminating expansion (0.5) while the number 1/3 does not (0.333...). In base-2 only rationals with denominators that are powers of 2 (such as 1/2 or 3/16) are terminating. Any rational with a denominator that has a prime factor other than 2 will have an infinite binary expansion. This means that numbers which appear to be short and exact when written in decimal format may need to be approximated when converted to binary floating-point. For example, the decimal number 0.1 is not representable in binary floating-point of any finite precision; the exact binary representation would have a "1100" sequence continuing endlessly:
where, as previously, "s" is the significand and "e" is the exponent.
When rounded to 24 bits this becomes
which is actually 0.100000001490116119384765625 in decimal.
As a further example, the real number π, represented in binary as an infinite sequence of bits is
but is
when approximated by rounding to a precision of 24 bits.
In binary single-precision floating-point, this is represented as "s" = 1.10010010000111111011011 with "e" = 1.
This has a decimal value of
whereas a more accurate approximation of the true value of π is
The result of rounding differs from the true value by about 0.03 parts per million, and matches the decimal representation of π in the first 7 digits. The difference is the discretization error and is limited by the machine epsilon.
The arithmetical difference between two consecutive representable floating-point numbers which have the same exponent is called a unit in the last place (ULP). For example, if there is no representable number lying between the representable numbers 1.45a70c22 and 1.45a70c24, the ULP is 2×16, or 2. For numbers with a base-2 exponent part of 0, i.e. numbers with an absolute value higher than or equal to 1 but lower than 2, an ULP is exactly 2 or about 10 in single precision, and exactly 2 or about 10 in double precision. The mandated behavior of IEEE-compliant hardware is that the result be within one-half of a ULP.
Rounding is used when the exact result of a floating-point operation (or a conversion to floating-point format) would need more digits than there are digits in the significand. IEEE 754 requires "correct rounding": that is, the rounded result is as if infinitely precise arithmetic was used to compute the value and then rounded (although in implementation only three extra bits are needed to ensure this). There are several different rounding schemes (or "rounding modes"). Historically, truncation was the typical approach. Since the introduction of IEEE 754, the default method ("round to nearest, ties to even", sometimes called Banker's Rounding) is more commonly used. This method rounds the ideal (infinitely precise) result of an arithmetic operation to the nearest representable value, and gives that representation as the result. In the case of a tie, the value that would make the significand end in an even digit is chosen. The IEEE 754 standard requires the same rounding to be applied to all fundamental algebraic operations, including square root and conversions, when there is a numeric (non-NaN) result. It means that the results of IEEE 754 operations are completely determined in all bits of the result, except for the representation of NaNs. ("Library" functions such as cosine and log are not mandated.)
Alternative rounding options are also available. IEEE 754 specifies the following rounding modes:
Alternative modes are useful when the amount of error being introduced must be bounded. Applications that require a bounded error are multi-precision floating-point, and interval arithmetic.
The alternative rounding modes are also useful in diagnosing numerical instability: if the results of a subroutine vary substantially between rounding to + and − infinity then it is likely numerically unstable and affected by round-off error.
Converting a binary floating-point number to a decimal string is a common operation, but an algorithm producing results that are both accurate and minimal did not appear in print until 1990, with Steele and White's Dragon4. Some of the improvements since then include:
Many modern language runtimes use Grisu3 with a Dragon4 fallback.
For ease of presentation and understanding, decimal radix with 7 digit precision will be used in the examples, as in the IEEE 754 "decimal32" format. The fundamental principles are the same in any radix or precision, except that normalization is optional (it does not affect the numerical value of the result). Here, "s" denotes the significand and "e" denotes the exponent.
A simple method to add floating-point numbers is to first represent them with the same exponent. In the example below, the second number is shifted right by three digits, and one then proceeds with the usual addition method:
In detail:
This is the true result, the exact sum of the operands. It will be rounded to seven digits and then normalized if necessary. The final result is
The lowest three digits of the second operand (654) are essentially lost. This is round-off error. In extreme cases, the sum of two non-zero numbers may be equal to one of them:
In the above conceptual examples it would appear that a large number of extra digits would need to be provided by the adder to ensure correct rounding; however, for binary addition or subtraction using careful implementation techniques only two extra "guard" bits and one extra "sticky" bit need to be carried beyond the precision of the operands.
Another problem of loss of significance occurs when two nearly equal numbers are subtracted. In the following example "e" = 5; "s" = 1.234571 and "e" = 5; "s" = 1.234567 are representations of the rationals 123457.1467 and 123456.659.
The best representation of this difference is "e" = −1; "s" = 4.877000, which differs more than 20% from "e" = −1; "s" = 4.000000. In extreme cases, all significant digits of precision can be lost (although gradual underflow ensures that the result will not be zero unless the two operands were equal). This "cancellation" illustrates the danger in assuming that all of the digits of a computed result are meaningful. Dealing with the consequences of these errors is a topic in numerical analysis; see also Accuracy problems.
To multiply, the significands are multiplied while the exponents are added, and the result is rounded and normalized.
Similarly, division is accomplished by subtracting the divisor's exponent from the dividend's exponent, and dividing the dividend's significand by the divisor's significand.
There are no cancellation or absorption problems with multiplication or division, though small errors may accumulate as operations are performed in succession. In practice, the way these operations are carried out in digital logic can be quite complex (see Booth's multiplication algorithm and Division algorithm).
For a fast, simple method, see the Horner method.
Floating-point computation in a computer can run into three kinds of problems:
Prior to the IEEE standard, such conditions usually caused the program to terminate, or triggered some kind
of trap that the programmer might be able to catch. How this worked was system-dependent,
meaning that floating-point programs were not portable. (The term "exception" as used in IEEE 754 is a general term meaning an exceptional condition, which is not necessarily an error, and is a different usage to that typically defined in programming languages such as a C++ or Java, in which an "exception" is an alternative flow of control, closer to what is termed a "trap" in IEEE 754 terminology.)
Here, the required default method of handling exceptions according to IEEE 754 is discussed (the IEEE 754 optional trapping and other "alternate exception handling" modes are not discussed). Arithmetic exceptions are (by default) required to be recorded in "sticky" status flag bits. That they are "sticky" means that they are not reset by the next (arithmetic) operation, but stay set until explicitly reset. The use of "sticky" flags thus allows for testing of exceptional conditions to be delayed until after a full floating-point expression or subroutine: without them exceptional conditions that could not be otherwise ignored would require explicit testing immediately after every floating-point operation. By default, an operation always returns a result according to specification without interrupting computation. For instance, 1/0 returns +∞, while also setting the divide-by-zero flag bit (this default of ∞ is designed to often return a finite result when used in subsequent operations and so be safely ignored).
The original IEEE 754 standard, however, failed to recommend operations to handle such sets of arithmetic exception flag bits. So while these were implemented in hardware, initially programming language implementations typically did not provide a means to access them (apart from assembler). Over time some programming language standards (e.g., C99/C11 and Fortran) have been updated to specify methods to access and change status flag bits. The 2008 version of the IEEE 754 standard now specifies a few operations for accessing and handling the arithmetic flag bits. The programming model is based on a single thread of execution and use of them by multiple threads has to be handled by a means outside of the standard (e.g. C11 specifies that the flags have thread-local storage).
IEEE 754 specifies five arithmetic exceptions that are to be recorded in the status flags ("sticky bits"):
The default return value for each of the exceptions is designed to give the correct result in the majority of cases such that the exceptions can be ignored in the majority of codes. "inexact" returns a correctly rounded result, and "underflow" returns a denormalized small value and so can almost always be ignored. "divide-by-zero" returns infinity exactly, which will typically then divide a finite number and so give zero, or else will give an "invalid" exception subsequently if not, and so can also typically be ignored. For example, the effective resistance of n resistors in parallel (see fig. 1) is given by formula_17. If a short-circuit develops with formula_18 set to 0, formula_19 will return +infinity which will give a final formula_20 of 0, as expected (see the continued fraction example of for another example).
"Overflow" and "invalid" exceptions can typically not be ignored, but do not necessarily represent errors: for example, a root-finding routine, as part of its normal operation, may evaluate a passed-in function at values outside of its domain, returning NaN and an "invalid" exception flag to be ignored until finding a useful start point.
The fact that floating-point numbers cannot precisely represent all real numbers, and that floating-point operations cannot precisely represent true arithmetic operations, leads to many surprising situations. This is related to the finite precision with which computers generally represent numbers.
For example, the non-representability of 0.1 and 0.01 (in binary) means that the result of attempting to square 0.1 is neither 0.01 nor the representable number closest to it. In 24-bit (single precision) representation, 0.1 (decimal) was given previously as "e" = −4; "s" = 110011001100110011001101, which is
Squaring this number gives
Squaring it with single-precision floating-point hardware (with rounding) gives
But the representable number closest to 0.01 is
Also, the non-representability of π (and π/2) means that an attempted computation of tan(π/2) will not yield a result of infinity, nor will it even overflow. It is simply not possible for standard floating-point hardware to attempt to compute tan(π/2), because π/2 cannot be represented exactly. This computation in C:
/* Enough digits to be sure we get the correct approximation. */
double pi = 3.1415926535897932384626433832795;
double z = tan(pi/2.0);
will give a result of 16331239353195370.0. In single precision (using the tanf function), the result will be −22877332.0.
By the same token, an attempted computation of sin(π) will not yield zero. The result will be (approximately) 0.1225 in double precision, or −0.8742 in single precision.
While floating-point addition and multiplication are both commutative ("a" + "b" = "b" + "a" and "a" × "b" = "b" × "a"), they are not necessarily associative. That is, ("a" + "b") + "c" is not necessarily equal to "a" + ("b" + "c"). Using 7-digit significand decimal arithmetic:
They are also not necessarily distributive. That is, ("a" + "b") × "c" may not be the same as "a" × "c" + "b" × "c":
In addition to loss of significance, inability to represent numbers such as π and 0.1 exactly, and other slight inaccuracies, the following phenomena may occur:
"Machine precision" is a quantity that characterizes the accuracy of a floating-point system, and is used in backward error analysis of floating-point algorithms. It is also known as unit roundoff or "machine epsilon". Usually denoted Ε, its value depends on the particular rounding being used.
With rounding to zero,
whereas rounding to nearest,
This is important since it bounds the "relative error" in representing any non-zero real number x within the normalized range of a floating-point system:
Backward error analysis, the theory of which was developed and popularized by James H. Wilkinson, can be used to establish that an algorithm implementing a numerical function is numerically stable. The basic approach is to show that although the calculated result, due to roundoff errors, will not be exactly correct, it is the exact solution to a nearby problem with slightly perturbed input data. If the perturbation required is small, on the order of the uncertainty in the input data, then the results are in some sense as accurate as the data "deserves". The algorithm is then defined as "backward stable". Stability is a measure of the sensitivity to rounding errors of a given numerical procedure; by contrast, the condition number of a function for a given problem indicates the inherent sensitivity of the function to small perturbations in its input and is independent of the implementation used to solve the problem.
As a trivial example, consider a simple expression giving the inner product of (length two) vectors formula_25 and formula_26, then
and so
where
where
by definition, which is the sum of two slightly perturbed (on the order of Ε) input data, and so is backward stable. For more realistic examples in numerical linear algebra, see Higham 2002 and other references below.
Although, as noted previously, individual arithmetic operations of IEEE 754 are guaranteed accurate to within half a ULP, more complicated formulae can suffer from larger errors due to round-off. The loss of accuracy can be substantial if a problem or its data are ill-conditioned, meaning that the correct result is hypersensitive to tiny perturbations in its data. However, even functions that are well-conditioned can suffer from large loss of accuracy if an algorithm numerically unstable for that data is used: apparently equivalent formulations of expressions in a programming language can differ markedly in their numerical stability. One approach to remove the risk of such loss of accuracy is the design and analysis of numerically stable algorithms, which is an aim of the branch of mathematics known as numerical analysis. Another approach that can protect against the risk of numerical instabilities is the computation of intermediate (scratch) values in an algorithm at a higher precision than the final result requires, which can remove, or reduce by orders of magnitude, such risk: IEEE 754 quadruple precision and extended precision are designed for this purpose when computing at double precision.
For example, the following algorithm is a direct implementation to compute the function A(x) = (x−1) / (exp(x−1) − 1) which is well-conditioned at 1.0, however it can be shown to be numerically unstable and lose up to half the significant digits carried by the arithmetic when computed near 1.0.
double A(double X)
If, however, intermediate computations are all performed in extended precision (e.g. by setting line [1] to C99 long double), then up to full precision in the final double result can be maintained. Alternatively, a numerical analysis of the algorithm reveals that if the following non-obvious change to line [2] is made:
then the algorithm becomes numerically stable and can compute to full double precision.
To maintain the properties of such carefully constructed numerically stable programs, careful handling by the compiler is required. Certain "optimizations" that compilers might make (for example, reordering operations) can work against the goals of well-behaved software. There is some controversy about the failings of compilers and language designs in this area: C99 is an example of a language where such optimizations are carefully specified to maintain numerical precision. See the external references at the bottom of this article.
A detailed treatment of the techniques for writing high-quality floating-point software is beyond the scope of this article, and the reader is referred to, and the other references at the bottom of this article. Kahan suggests several rules of thumb that can substantially decrease by orders of magnitude the risk of numerical anomalies, in addition to, or in lieu of, a more careful numerical analysis. These include: as noted above, computing all expressions and intermediate results in the highest precision supported in hardware (a common rule of thumb is to carry twice the precision of the desired result i.e. compute in double precision for a final single precision result, or in double extended or quad precision for up to double precision results); and rounding input data and results to only the precision required and supported by the input data (carrying excess precision in the final result beyond that required and supported by the input data can be misleading, increases storage cost and decreases speed, and the excess bits can affect convergence of numerical procedures: notably, the first form of the iterative example given below converges correctly when using this rule of thumb). Brief descriptions of several additional issues and techniques follow.
As decimal fractions can often not be exactly represented in binary floating-point, such arithmetic is at its best when it is simply being used to measure real-world quantities over a wide range of scales (such as the orbital period of a moon around Saturn or the mass of a proton), and at its worst when it is expected to model the interactions of quantities expressed as decimal strings that are expected to be exact. An example of the latter case is financial calculations. For this reason, financial software tends not to use a binary floating-point number representation. The "decimal" data type of the C# and Python programming languages, and the decimal formats of the IEEE 754-2008 standard, are designed to avoid the problems of binary floating-point representations when applied to human-entered exact decimal values, and make the arithmetic always behave as expected when numbers are printed in decimal.
Expectations from mathematics may not be realized in the field of floating-point computation. For example, it is known that formula_32, and that formula_33, however these facts cannot be relied on when the quantities involved are the result of floating-point computation.
The use of the equality test (codice_2) requires care when dealing with floating-point numbers. Even simple expressions like codice_3 will, on most computers, fail to be true (in IEEE 754 double precision, for example, codice_4 is approximately equal to -4.44089209850063e-16). Consequently, such tests are sometimes replaced with "fuzzy" comparisons (codice_5, where epsilon is sufficiently small and tailored to the application, such as 1.0E−13). The wisdom of doing this varies greatly, and can require numerical analysis to bound epsilon. Values derived from the primary data representation and their comparisons should be performed in a wider, extended, precision to minimize the risk of such inconsistencies due to round-off errors. It is often better to organize the code in such a way that such tests are unnecessary. For example, in computational geometry, exact tests of whether a point lies off or on a line or plane defined by other points can be performed using adaptive precision or exact arithmetic methods.
Small errors in floating-point arithmetic can grow when mathematical algorithms perform operations an enormous number of times. A few examples are matrix inversion, eigenvector computation, and differential equation solving. These algorithms must be very carefully designed, using numerical approaches such as Iterative refinement, if they are to work well.
Summation of a vector of floating-point values is a basic algorithm in scientific computing, and so an awareness of when loss of significance can occur is essential. For example, if one is adding a very large number of numbers, the individual addends are very small compared with the sum. This can lead to loss of significance. A typical addition would then be something like
The low 3 digits of the addends are effectively lost. Suppose, for example, that one needs to add many numbers, all approximately equal to 3. After 1000 of them have been added, the running sum is about 3000; the lost digits are not regained. The Kahan summation algorithm may be used to reduce the errors.
Round-off error can affect the convergence and accuracy of iterative numerical procedures. As an example, Archimedes approximated π by calculating the perimeters of polygons inscribing and circumscribing a circle, starting with hexagons, and successively doubling the number of sides. As noted above, computations may be rearranged in a way that is mathematically equivalent but less prone to error (numerical analysis).
Two forms of the recurrence formula for the circumscribed polygon are:
Here is a computation using IEEE "double" (a significand with 53 bits of precision) arithmetic:
While the two forms of the recurrence formula are clearly mathematically equivalent, the first subtracts 1 from a number extremely close to 1, leading to an increasingly problematic loss of significant digits. As the recurrence is applied repeatedly, the accuracy improves at first, but then it deteriorates. It never gets better than about 8 digits, even though 53-bit arithmetic should be capable of about 16 digits of precision. When the second form of the recurrence is used, the value converges to 15 digits of precision.

</doc>
<doc id="11378" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11378" title="First Epistle to the Corinthians">
First Epistle to the Corinthians

The First Epistle to the Corinthians (), usually referred to as First Corinthians or 1 Corinthians is a Pauline epistle of the New Testament of the Christian Bible. The epistle is attributed to Paul the Apostle and a co-author named Sosthenes, and is addressed to the Christian church in Corinth. Scholars believe that Sosthenes was the amanuensis who wrote down the text of the letter at Paul's direction. It addresses various issues that had arisen in the Christian community at Corinth and it is composed in a form of Koine Greek.
There is a consensus among historians and theologians that Paul is the author of the First Epistle to the Corinthians (c. AD 53–54). The letter is quoted or mentioned by the earliest of sources, and is included in every ancient canon, including that of Marcion of Sinope. Some scholars point to the epistle's potentially embarrassing references to the existence of sexual immorality in the church as strengthening the case for the authenticity of the letter.
However, the epistle does contain a passage that is widely believed to have been interpolated into the text by a later scribe:
Part of the reason for suspecting that this passage is an interpolation is that in some manuscripts, it is placed at the end of Chapter 14, instead of at its canonical location. This kind of variability is generally considered by textual critics to be a sign that a note, initially placed in the margins of the document, has been copied into the body of the text by a scribe. The passage also seems to contradict 11:5, where women are described as praying and prophesying in church.
Furthermore, some scholars believe that the passage constitutes a separate letter fragment or scribal interpolation because it equates the consumption of meat sacrificed to idols with idolatry, while Paul seems to be more lenient on this issue in and . Such views are rejected by other scholars who give arguments for the unity of .
About the year AD 50, towards the end of his second missionary journey, Paul founded the church in Corinth, before moving on to Ephesus, a city on the west coast of today's Turkey, about 180 miles by sea from Corinth. From there he traveled to Caesarea, and Antioch. Paul returned to Ephesus on his third missionary journey and spent approximately three years there (, , ). It was while staying in Ephesus that he received disconcerting news of the community in Corinth regarding jealousies, rivalry, and immoral behavior. It also appears that based on a letter the Corinthians sent Paul (e.g. ), the congregation was requesting clarification on a number of matters, such as marriage and the consumption of meat previously offered to idols.
By comparing Acts of the Apostles and mentions of Ephesus in the Corinthian correspondence, scholars suggest that the letter was written during Paul's stay in Ephesus, which is usually dated as being in the range of AD 53–57.
Anthony C. Thiselton suggests that it is possible that I Corinthians was written during Paul's first (brief) stay in Ephesus, at the end of his Second Journey, usually dated to early AD 54. However, it is more likely that it was written during his extended stay in Ephesus, where he refers to sending Timothy to them (, ).
The epistle may be divided into seven parts:
 Some time before 2 Corinthians was written, Paul paid them a second visit (; ) to check some rising disorder (; ), and wrote them a letter, now lost (). They had also been visited by Apollos (), perhaps by Peter (), and by some Jewish Christians who brought with them letters of commendation from Jerusalem (; ; ; ).
Paul wrote this letter to correct what he saw as erroneous views in the Corinthian church. Several sources informed Paul of conflicts within the church at Corinth: Apollos (Acts 19:1), a letter from the Corinthians, the "household of Chloe", and finally Stephanas and his two friends who had visited Paul (1:11; 16:17). Paul then wrote this letter to the Corinthians, urging uniformity of belief ("that ye all speak the same thing and that there be no divisions among you", 1:10) and expounding Christian doctrine. Titus and a brother whose name is not given were probably the bearers of the letter to the church at Corinth (2 Corinthians 2:13; 8:6, 16–18).
In general, divisions within the church at Corinth seem to be a problem, and Paul makes it a point to mention these conflicts in the beginning. Specifically, pagan roots still hold sway within their community. Paul wants to bring them back to what he sees as correct doctrine, stating that God has given him the opportunity to be a "skilled master builder" to lay the foundation and let others build upon it (1 Cor 3:10).
Later, Paul wrote about immorality in Corinth by discussing an immoral brother, how to resolve personal disputes, and sexual purity. Regarding marriage, Paul states that it is better for Christians to remain unmarried, but that if they lacked self-control, it is better to marry than "burn" (πυροῦσθαι) which Christians have traditionally thought meant to burn with sinful desires. The Epistle may include marriage as an apostolic practice in 1 Corinthians 9:5, "Do we not have the right to be accompanied by a believing wife, as do the other apostles and the brothers of the Lord and Cephas (Peter)?" (In the last case, the letter concurs with Matthew 8:14, which mentions Peter having a mother-in-law and thus, by inference, a wife.) However, the Greek word for "wife" is the same word for "woman". The Early Church Fathers including Tertullian, Jerome, and Augustine state the Greek word is ambiguous and the women in 1 Corinthians 9:5 were women ministering to the Apostles as women ministered to Christ (cf. , Luke 8:1–3), and were not wives, and assert they left their "offices of marriage" to follow Christ.
Paul also argues that married people must please their spouses, just as every Christian must please God. The letter is also notable for mentioning the role of women in churches, that for instance they must remain silent (1 Cor. 14:34–35), and yet they have a role of prophecy and apparently speaking tongues in churches (11:2–16). If 14:34–35 is not an interpolation, certain scholars resolve the tension between these texts by positing that wives were either contesting their husband's inspired speeches at church, or the wives/women were chatting and asking questions in a disorderly manner when others were giving inspired utterances. Their silence was unique to the particular situation in the Corinthian gatherings at that time, and on this reading, Paul did not intend his words to be universalized for all women of all churches of all eras. After discussing his views on worshipping idols, Paul finally ends with his views on resurrection. He states that Christ died for our sins, and was buried, and rose on the third day according to the scriptures (). Paul then asks: "Now if Christ is preached as raised from the dead, how can some of you say that there is no resurrection of the dead?" (1 Cor. 15:12) and addresses the question of resurrection.
Throughout the letter, Paul presents issues that are troubling the community in Corinth and offers ways to fix them. Paul states that this letter is to "admonish" them as beloved children. They are expected to become imitators of Jesus and follow the ways in Christ as he, Paul, teaches in all his churches (1 Cor. 4:14–16).
This epistle contains some well-known phrases, including: "all things to all men" (), "through a glass, darkly" (), and "When I was a child, I spoke as a child, I understood as a child, I thought as a child" ().
St. John Chrysostom, Doctor of the Church, wrote a commentary on 1 Corinthians, formed by 44 homilies.

</doc>
<doc id="11379" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11379" title="List of Scots">
List of Scots

List of Scots is an incomplete list of notable people from Scotland.

</doc>
<doc id="11380" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11380" title="List of South Africans">
List of South Africans

This is a list of notable and famous South Africans who are the subjects of Wikipedia articles.
Also see: Prelates, clerics and evangelists
Cardinal Wilfred Napier
See also: South African poets and Afrikaans language poets
See also: Gcaleka rulers, <br>Rharhabe rulers<br>,<br> Xhosa Chiefs,<br> Zulus

</doc>
<doc id="11382" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11382" title="File manager">
File manager

A file manager or file browser is a computer program that provides a user interface to manage files and folders. The most common operations performed on files or groups of files include creating, opening (e.g. viewing, playing, editing or printing), renaming, moving or copying, deleting and searching for files, as well as modifying file attributes, properties and file permissions. Folders and files may be displayed in a hierarchical tree based on their directory structure. Some file managers contain features inspired by web browsers, including forward and back navigational buttons.
Some file managers provide network connectivity via protocols, such as FTP, HTTP, NFS, SMB or WebDAV. This is achieved by allowing the user to browse for a file server (connecting and accessing the server's file system like a local file system) or by providing its own full client implementations for file server protocols.
A term that predates the usage of "file manager" is "directory editor". An early directory editor, DIRED, was developed circa 1974 at the Stanford Artificial Intelligence Laboratory by Stan Kugell.
A directory editor was written for EXEC 8 at the University of Maryland, and was available to other users at that time. The term was used by other developers, including Jay Lepreau, who wrote the dired program in 1980, which ran on BSD. This was in turn inspired by an older program with the same name running on TOPS-20. Dired inspired other programs, including dired, the editor script (for emacs and similar editors), and ded.
"File-list" file managers are lesser known and older than orthodox file managers.
One such file manager is flist, which was introduced sometime before 1980 on the Conversational Monitor System.
This is a variant of fulist, which originated before late 1978, according to comments by its author, Theo Alkema.
The flist program provided a list of files in the user's minidisk, and allowed sorting by any file attribute. The file attributes could be passed to scripts or function-key definitions, making it simple to use flist as part of CMS EXEC, EXEC 2 or XEDIT scripts.
This program ran only on IBM VM/SP CMS, but was the inspiration for other programs, including filelist (a script run via the Xedit editor), and programs running on other operating systems, including a program also called flist, which ran on OpenVMS, and fulist (from the name of the corresponding internal IBM program), which runs on Unix.
Orthodox file managers (sometimes abbreviated to "OFM") or command-based file managers are text-menu based file managers, that commonly have three windows (two panels and one command line window). Orthodox file managers are one of the longest running families of file managers, preceding graphical user interface-based types. Developers create applications that duplicate and extend the manager that was introduced by PathMinder and John Socha's Norton Commander for DOS. The concept dates to the mid-1980s—PathMinder was released in 1984, and Norton Commander version 1.0 was released in 1986. Despite the age of this concept, file managers based on Norton Commander are actively developed, and dozens of implementations exist for DOS, Unix, and Microsoft Windows. Nikolai Bezroukov publishes his own set of criteria for an OFM standard (version 1.2 dated June 1997).
An orthodox file manager typically has three windows. Two of the windows are called panels and are positioned symmetrically at the top of the screen. The third is the command line, which is essentially a minimized command (shell) window that can be expanded to full screen. Only one of the panels is active at a given time. The active panel contains the "file cursor". Panels are resizable and can be hidden. Files in the active panel serve as the source of file operations performed by the manager. For example, files can be copied or moved from the active panel to the location represented in the passive panel. This scheme is most effective for systems in which the keyboard is the primary or sole input device. The active panel shows information about the current working directory and the files that it contains. The passive (inactive) panel shows the content of the same or another directory (the default target for file operations). Users may customize the display of columns that show relevant file information. The active panel and passive panel can be switched (often by pressing the tab key).
The following features describe the class of orthodox file managers.
Other common features include:
The introduction of tabbed panels in some file managers (for example Total Commander) made it possible to manipulate more than one active and passive directory at a time.
Orthodox file managers are among the most portable file managers. Examples are available on almost any platform, with both command-line and graphical interfaces. This is unusual among command line managers in that something purporting to be a standard for the interface is published. They are also actively supported by developers. This makes it possible to do the same work on different platforms without much relearning of the interface.
Sometimes they are called dual-pane managers, a term that is typically used for programs such as the Windows File Explorer (see below). But they have three panes including a command line pane below (or hidden behind) two symmetric panes. Furthermore, most of these programs allow using just one of the two larger panes with the second hidden. Some also add an item to the Context Menu in Windows to "Open two Explorers, side by side".
Notable ones include:
A navigational file manager is a newer type of file manager. Since the advent of GUIs, it has become the dominant type of file manager for desktop computers.
Typically, it has two panes, with the filesystem tree in the left pane and the contents of the current directory in the right pane. For macOS, the Miller columns view in Finder (originating in NeXTStep) is a variation on the navigational file manager theme.
The interface in a navigational file manager often resembles a web browser, complete with "back" and "forward" buttons, and often "reload" buttons. Most also contain an address bar into which the file or directory path (or URI) can be typed.
Most navigational file managers have two panes, the left pane being a tree view of the filesystem. This means that unlike orthodox file managers, the two panes are asymmetrical in their content and use.
Selecting a directory in the Navigation pane on the left designates it as the current directory, displaying its contents in the Contents pane on the right. However, expanding (+) or collapsing (-) a portion of the tree without selecting a directory will not alter the contents of the right pane. The exception to this behavior applies when collapsing a parent of the current directory, in which case the selection is refocused on the collapsed parent directory, thus altering the list in the Contents pane.
The process of moving from one location to another need not open a new window. Several instances of the file manager can be opened simultaneously and communicate with each other via drag-and-drop and clipboard operations, so it is possible to view several directories simultaneously and perform cut-and paste operations between instances.
File operations are based on drag-and-drop and editor metaphors: users can select and copy files or directories onto the clipboard and then paste them in a different place in the filesystem or even in a different instance of the file manager.
Notable examples of navigational file managers include:
Spatial file managers use a spatial metaphor to represent files and directories as if they were actual physical objects. A spatial file manager imitates the way people interact with physical objects.
Some ideas behind the concept of a spatial file manager are:
As in navigational file managers, when a directory is opened, the icon representing the directory changes—perhaps from an image showing a closed drawer to an opened one, perhaps the directory's icon turns into a silhouette filled with a pattern—and a new window is opened to represent that directory.
Examples of file managers that use a spatial metaphor to some extent include:
Dysfunctional spatial file managers:
Some projects have attempted to implement a three-dimensional method of displaying files and directory structures. Three-dimensional file browsing has not become popular; the exact implementation tends to differ between projects, and there are no common standards to follow.
Examples of three-dimensional file managers include:
Web-based file managers are typically scripts written in either PHP, Ajax, Perl, ASP or another server-side language. When installed on a local server or on a remote server, they allow files and directories located there to be managed and edited, using a web browser, without the need for FTP Access.
More advanced, and usually commercially distributed, web-based file management scripts allow the administrator of the file manager to configure secure, individual user accounts, each with individual account permissions. Authorized users have access to documents stored on the server or in their individual user directories anytime, from anywhere, via a web browser.
A web-based file manager can serve as an organization's digital repository. For example, documents, digital media, publishing layouts, and presentations can be stored, managed, and shared between customers, suppliers, and remote workers, or just internally.
Web-based file managers are becoming increasingly popular due to the rise in popularity of dynamic web content management systems (CMS) and the need for non-technical website moderators to manage media on their websites powered by these platforms.
An example is net2ftp, a PHP- and JavaScript-based FTP client.

</doc>
<doc id="11385" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11385" title="File viewer">
File viewer

A file viewer is an application software that presents the data stored in a computer file in a human-friendly form. The file contents are generally displayed on the screen, or they may be printed. Also, they may be read aloud using speech synthesis.
File viewers do not edit files, yet it is common for them to be able to export data in a different file format, or to copy information from the viewed to the system-wide clipboard. A file viewer is limited-functionality software in the sense that it does not have a capability to create a file, or modify the content of an existing one. Instead, it is used only to display or print the content.
File viewers have to have sufficient knowledge about the file format to be viewed in order to handle different byte orders, code pages or newline styles.
Some file viewer may be classified as filters that translate binary files into plain text (one example antiword). However, depending on the competence of the translating routines, some information may be lost.
Image viewers display graphics files onscreen. Most viewers are capable of reading multiple graphics file formats but some such as JPEGview are dedicated to a single format. Common image viewer features include thumbnail preview and creation, and image zooming.
For more complex or proprietary file formats, file viewers are usually provided by the same companies that make the editing software using those formats. Viewers are usually distributed free of charge, while editors have to be bought. For example, the full version of Adobe Acrobat can be used to create content for most computer platforms. To ensure that people can access the documents created with Adobe Acrobat, the software publisher created a viewer program, the Acrobat Reader, and made it available for free. Microsoft also makes viewers for Word and PowerPoint documents freely available. These viewer applications allow the file format to be readable on all supported operating-systems, free of charge, making the commercial product a more attractive solution.
A web browser is a type of file viewer, which renders HTML markup into a human-friendly presentation. Although HTML is stored in plain text files, viewing an HTML file in a browser and in a text editor produces significantly different results. Web browsers may also be used to view image and multimedia files.
There are also types of data that are not intended for static display — these incorporate the time dimension. Viewers for such formats are named players. But the essence is the same — presenting file contents in human-friendly form (i.e. displaying video on the screen as intended, or playing sound through loudspeakers). And the same consideration of different file formats is present.

</doc>
<doc id="11387" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11387" title="First Epistle of Peter">
First Epistle of Peter

The First Epistle of Peter, usually referred to simply as First Peter and often written 1 Peter, is a book of the New Testament. The author presents himself as Peter the Apostle, and, following Catholic tradition, the epistle has been held to have been written during his time as Bishop of Rome or Bishop of Antioch, though neither title is used in the epistle. The text of the letter includes a statement that implies that it was written from "Babylon", which is possibly a reference to Rome. The letter is addressed to various churches in Asia Minor suffering religious persecution.
The authorship of 1 Peter has traditionally been attributed to the Apostle Peter because it bears his name and identifies him as its author (1:1). Although the text identifies Peter as its author, the language, dating, style, and structure of this letter have led many scholars to conclude that it is pseudonymous. Many scholars argue that Peter was not the author of the letter because its writer appears to have had a formal education in rhetoric and philosophy, and an advanced knowledge of the Greek language, none of which would be usual for a Galilean fisherman.
Graham Stanton rejects Petrine authorship because 1 Peter was most likely written during the reign of Domitian in AD 81, which is when he believes widespread Christian persecution began, which is long after the death of Peter. However, current scholarship has abandoned the persecution argument because the described persecution within the work does not necessitate a time period outside of the period of Peter. Other scholars doubt Petrine authorship because they are convinced that 1 Peter is dependent on the Pauline epistles and thus was written after Paul the Apostle's ministry because it shares many of the same motifs espoused in Ephesians, Colossians, and the Pastoral Epistles. Others argue that it makes little sense to ascribe the work to Peter when it could have been ascribed to Paul. Alternatively, one theory supporting legitimate Petrine authorship of 1 Peter is the "secretarial hypothesis", which suggests that 1 Peter was dictated by Peter and was written in Greek by his secretary, Silvanus (5:12). John Elliot disagrees, suggesting that the notion of Silvanus as secretary or author or drafter of 1 Peter introduces more problems than it solves because the Greek rendition of 5:12 suggests that Silvanus was not the secretary, but the courier/bearer of 1 Peter, and some see Mark as a contributive amanuensis in the composition and writing of the work. On the one hand, some scholars such as Bart D. Ehrman are convinced that the language, dating, literary style, and structure of this text makes it implausible to conclude that 1 Peter was written by Peter; according to these scholars, it is more likely that 1 Peter is a pseudonymous letter, written later by one of the disciples of Peter in his honor. On the other hand, some scholars argue that there is enough evidence to conclude that Peter did, in fact, write 1 Peter. For instance, there are similarities between 1 Peter and Peter's speeches in the Biblical book of Acts, allusions to several historical sayings of Jesus indicative of eyewitness testimony (e.g., compare Luke 12:35 with 1 Peter 1:13, Matthew 5:16 with 1 Peter 2:12, and Matthew 5:10 with 1 Peter 3:14), and early attestation of Peter's authorship found in 2 Peter (AD 60–160) and the letters of Clement (AD 70-140), all supporting genuine Petrine origin. Ultimately, the authorship of 1 Peter remains contested.
1 Peter is addressed to the "elect resident aliens" scattered throughout Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and Bithynia. The five areas listed in 1:1 as the geographical location of the first readers were Roman provinces in Asia Minor. The order in which the provinces are listed may reflect the route to be taken by the messenger who delivered the circular letter. The recipients of this letter are referred to in 1:1 as "exiles of the Dispersion". In 1:17, they are urged to "live in reverent fear during the time of your exile". The social makeup of the addressees of 1 Peter is debatable because some scholars interpret "strangers" (1:1) as Christians longing for their home in heaven, some interpret it as literal "strangers", or as an Old Testament adaptation applied to Christian believers.
While the new Christians have encountered oppression and hostility from locals, Peter advises them to maintain loyalty to both their religion and the Roman Empire (1 Peter 2:17).
The author counsels (1) to steadfastness and perseverance under persecution (1–2:10); (2) to the practical duties of a holy life (2:11–3:13); (3) he adduces the example of Christ and other motives to patience and holiness (3:14–4:19); and (4) concludes with counsels to pastors and people (chap. 5).
David Bartlett lists the following outline to structure the literary divisions of 1 Peter.
The Petrine author writes of his addressees undergoing "various trials" (1 Peter 1:6), being "tested by fire" (which isn't a physical reference but a metaphor for a spiritual warfare) (1:7), maligned "as evildoers" (2:12) and suffering "for doing good" (3:17). Based on such internal evidence, biblical scholar John Elliott summarizes the addressees' situation as one marked by undeserved suffering. Verse (), "Spirits in prison", is a continuing theme in Christianity, and one considered by most theologians to be enigmatic and difficult to interpret.
A number of verses in the epistle contain possible clues about the reasons Christians experienced opposition. Exhortations to live blameless lives (2:15; 3:9, 13, 16) may suggest that the Christian addressees were accused of immoral behavior, and exhortations to civil obedience (2:13–17) perhaps imply that they were accused of disloyalty to governing powers.
However, scholars differ on the nature of persecution inflicted on the addressees of 1 Peter. Some read the epistle to be describing persecution in the form of social discrimination, while some read them to be official persecution.
Some scholars believe that the sufferings the epistle's addressees were experiencing were social in nature, specifically in the form of verbal derision. Internal evidence for this includes the use of words like "malign" (2:12; 3:16), and "reviled" (4:14). Biblical scholar John Elliott notes that the author explicitly urges the addressees to respect authority (2:13) and even honor the emperor (2:17), strongly suggesting that they were unlikely to be suffering from official Roman persecution. It is significant to him that the author notes that "your brothers and sisters in all the world are undergoing the same kinds of suffering" (5:9), indicating suffering that is worldwide in scope. Elliott sees this as grounds to reject the idea that the epistle refers to official persecution, because the first worldwide persecution of Christians officially meted by Rome did not occur until the persecution initiated by Decius in AD 250.
On the other hand, scholars who support the official persecution theory take the exhortation to defend one's faith (3:15) as a reference to official court proceedings. They believe that these persecutions involved court trials before Roman authorities, and even executions.
One common supposition is that 1 Peter was written during the reign of Domitian (AD 81–96). Domitian's aggressive claim to divinity would have been rejected and resisted by Christians. Biblical scholar Paul Achtemeier believes that persecution of Christians by Domitian would have been in character, but points out that there is no evidence of official policy targeted specifically at Christians. If Christians were persecuted, it is likely to have been part of Domitian's larger policy suppressing all opposition to his self-proclaimed divinity. There are other scholars who explicitly dispute the idea of contextualizing 1 Peter within Domitian's reign. Duane Warden believes that Domitian's unpopularity even among Romans renders it highly unlikely that his actions would have great influence in the provinces, especially those under the direct supervision of the senate such as Asia (one of the provinces 1 Peter is addressed to).
Also often advanced as a possible context for 1 Peter is the trials and executions of Christians in the Roman province of Bithynia-Pontus under Pliny the Younger. Scholars who support this theory believe that a famous letter from Pliny to Emperor Trajan concerning the delation of Christians reflects the situation faced by the addressees of this epistle. In Pliny's letter, written in AD 112, he asks Trajan if the accused Christians brought before him should be punished based on the name 'Christian' alone, or for crimes associated with the name. For biblical scholar John Knox, the use of the word "name" in 4:14–16 is the "crucial point of contact" with that in Pliny's letter. In addition, many scholars in support of this theory believe that there is content within 1 Peter that directly mirrors the situation as portrayed in Pliny's letter. For instance, they interpret the exhortation to defend one's faith "with gentleness and reverence" in 3:15–16 as a response to Pliny executing Christians for the obstinate manner in which they professed to be Christians. Generally, this theory is rejected mainly by scholars who read the suffering in 1 Peter to be caused by social, rather than official, discrimination.
The author refers to Jesus, after his death, proclaiming to spirits in prison (3:18–20). This passage, and a few others (such as Matthew 27:52 and Luke 23:43), are the basis of the traditional Christian belief in the descent of Christ into hell, or the harrowing of hell. Though interpretations vary, some theologians see this passage as referring to Jesus, after his death, going to a place (neither heaven nor hell in the ultimate sense) where the souls of pre-Christian people waited for the Gospel. The first creeds to mention the harrowing of hell were Arian formularies of Sirmium (359), Nike (360), and Constantinople (360). It spread through the west and later appeared in the Apostles' Creed.
Online translations of the First Epistle of Peter:

</doc>
<doc id="11388" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11388" title="First Epistle of John">
First Epistle of John

The First Epistle of John, often referred to as First John and written 1 John or I John, is the first of the Johannine epistles of the New Testament, and the fourth of the catholic epistles. There is no scholarly consensus as to the authorship of the Johannine works. The author of the First Epistle is termed John the Evangelist, who most scholars believe is not the same as John the Apostle. Most scholars believe the three Johannine epistles have the same author, but there is no consensus if this was also the author of the Gospel of John.
This epistle was probably written in Ephesus between 95 and 110 AD. The author advises Christians on how to discern true teachers: by their ethics, their proclamation of Jesus in the flesh, and by their love. The original text was written in Koine Greek. The epistle is divided into five chapters.
The main themes of the epistle are love and fellowship with God. The author describes various tests by which readers may ascertain whether or not their communion with God is genuine, and teaches that the proof of spiritual regeneration is a life of active righteousness. It also distinguishes between the world (which is full of evil and under the dominion of Satan) and the children of God (who are set apart from the world).
The epistle is not written in the same form as the other biblical epistles, as it lacks an epistolary opening or conclusion. The epistle is written in a simple style, without syntactical flourishes, and makes frequent use of asyndeton, where related thoughts are placed next to one another without conjunctions. In contrast to the linear style used in the Pauline epistles, biblical scholar Ernest DeWitt Burton suggests that John's thought "moves in circles", forming a slowly advancing sequence of thought. This is similar to the parallel structure of Hebrew poetry, in which the second verse of a couplet often carries the same meaning as the first, although in this epistle the frequent recapitulations of already expressed ideas serve also to add to what has previously been said. In summary, the epistle may be said to exhibit a paraenetic style which is "marked by personal appeal, contrasts of right and wrong, true and false, and an occasional rhetorical question".
Some scholars have proposed the idea that the epistle is really John's commentary on a selection of traditional parallel couplets. While this theory, first propounded by Ernst von Dobschütz and Rudolf Bultmann, is not universally accepted, Amos Wilder writes that, "It is at least clear that there are considerable and sometimes continuous elements in the epistle whose style distinguishes them from that of the author both with respect to poetic structure and syntactic usage."
The epistle is traditionally held to have been composed by John the Evangelist, at Ephesus, when the writer was in advanced age. The epistle's content, language and conceptual style are very similar to the Gospel of John, 2 John, and 3 John. Thus, at the end of the 19th century scholar Ernest DeWitt Burton wrote that there could be "no reasonable doubt" that 1 John and the gospel were written by the same author.
Beginning in the 20th century, however, critical scholars like Heinrich Julius Holtzmann and C. H. Dodd identified the Gospel of John and 1 John as works of different authors. Certain linguistic features of the two texts support this view. For instance, 1 John often uses a demonstrative pronoun at the beginning of a sentence, then a particle or conjunction, followed by an explanation or definition of the demonstrative at the end of the sentence—a stylistic technique which is not used in the gospel. The author of the epistle also "uses the conditional sentence in a variety of rhetorical figures which are unknown to the gospel". This indicates, at the very least, the linguistic characteristics changed over time. Today, following the work of J. Louis Martyn and Raymond Brown, the majority of scholars believe that John and 1 John were written by different members of the same community: the "Johannine Community".
Most scholars conclude that John the Apostle wrote none of these works.
"The Fourth Gospel addresses itself to the challenges posed by Judaism and others outside Johannine circles who have rejected the community's vision of Jesus as preexistent Son, sent by the Father." The New Jerome Biblical Commentary suggests that the three Johannine epistles "describe the fracturing of the Johannine community itself".
The author wrote the epistle so that the joy of his audience would "be full" (1:4); that they would "not practice sin" (2:1); that they would not be deceived by false teachers (2:26); and that "you who believe in the name of the Son of God... may continue to know that you have eternal life" (5:13). There are two main approaches to understanding the overall purpose of the letter, tests of life (popularized by Robert Law) and tests of fellowship (popularized by John Mitchell and Zane Hodges). Whereas the Gospel of John was written for unbelievers (John 20:31), this epistle was written to those who were already believers (5:13). Ernest DeWitt Burton found it likely that its audience was largely gentile rather than Jewish, since it contains few Old Testament quotations or distinctly Jewish forms of expression.
The earliest written versions of the epistle have been lost; some of the earliest surviving manuscripts include:
The Muratorian fragment, dated to AD 170, cites chapter 1, verses 1–3 within a discussion of the Gospel of John. Papyrus 9, dating from the 3rd century, has surviving parts of chapter 4, verses 11–12 and 14–17.
Different versions of the Greek manuscript have different wording for some verses.
Verses 1-4 of the first chapter constitute a prologue or introduction concerning the Incarnate Word. Like the Prologue to John's Gospel, this introduction "tells us that what the Apostle purposes to write about is the Word who is the Life". Anglican commentator Alfred Plummer notes that "the similarity to the of the Gospel is manifest", but with a significant difference, in that the gospel refers to the existence of the , "lógos", word, before the creation, whereas here the point is that the word existed before the incarnation.
A Trinitarian gloss (marginal note) known as the Johannine Comma, added to Latin translations of the epistle in the 4th century, was interpolated (added to the main text) within 1 John 5:7-8 over the course of the Middle Ages. Although no Greek manuscripts before the 15th century include the passage, Erasmus added it to later editions of his edition of the New Testament, beginning in 1522. Bibles translated from his edition integrate the passage, including the King James Version (1611), which renders it as follows ("in italics"):
Translations made since the 18th century and based on a critical edition do not include this text, or include it as a footnote. Because the addition supports the doctrine of trinitarianism, it featured in Protestant and Catholic debates on this subject in the early modern period.
Plummer suggests that here, "as at the end of [John's] Gospel and the Second Epistle, 'Amen' is the addition of a copyist". The Textus Receptus version includes "Ἀμήν", "Amen", at the end but critical editions do not. J. B. Phillips, in his "New Testament in Modern English" adds the word "JOHN" at the end of the text.

</doc>
<doc id="11390" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11390" title="First Vatican Council">
First Vatican Council

The First Vatican Council () was convoked by Pope Pius IX on 29 June 1868, after a period of planning and preparation that began on 6 December 1864. This, the twentieth ecumenical council of the Catholic Church, held three centuries after the Council of Trent, opened on 8 December 1869 and adjourned on 20 October 1870. Unlike the five earlier general councils held in Rome, which met in the Lateran Basilica and are known as Lateran councils, it met in the Vatican Basilica, hence its name. Its best-known decision is its definition of papal infallibility.
The council was convoked to deal with the contemporary problems of the rising influence of rationalism, anarchism, communism, socialism, 
liberalism, and materialism. Its purpose was, besides this, to define the Catholic doctrine concerning the Church of Christ. There was discussion and approval of only two constitutions: the Dogmatic Constitution on the Catholic Faith () and the First Dogmatic Constitution on the Church of Christ (), the latter dealing with the primacy and infallibility of the Bishop of Rome. The first matter brought up for debate was the dogmatic draft of Catholic doctrine against the manifold errors due to rationalism. The Council condemned rationalism, liberalism, naturalism, materialism and pantheism. The Catholic Church was on the defensive against the main ideology of the 19th century.
This Council was summoned by Pope Pius IX by a bull on 29 June 1868. The first session was held in St. Peter's Basilica on 8 December 1869. Preliminary sessions dealt with general administrative matters and committee assignments. Bishop Bernard John McQuaid complained of rainy weather, inadequate heating facilities, and boredom. Bishop James Roosevelt Bayley of Newark, New Jersey, noted the high prices in Rome. When Lord Houghton asked Cardinal Manning what had been going on, he answered: “Well, we meet, and we look at one another, and then we talk a little, but when we want to know what we have been doing, we read the "Times"”.
The doctrine of papal infallibility was not new and had been used by Pope Pius in defining as dogma, in 1854, the Immaculate Conception of Mary, the mother of Jesus. However, the proposal to define papal infallibility itself as dogma met with resistance, not because of doubts about the substance of the proposed definition, but because some considered it inopportune to take that step at that time. Richard McBrien divides the bishops attending Vatican I into three groups. The first group, which McBrien calls the "active infallibilists", was led by Henry Edward Manning and Ignatius von Senestréy. According to McBrien, the majority of the bishops were not so much interested in a formal definition of papal infallibility as they were in strengthening papal authority and, because of this, were willing to accept the agenda of the infallibilists. A minority, some 10 per cent of the bishops, McBrien says, opposed the proposed definition of papal infallibility on both ecclesiastical and pragmatic grounds, because, in their opinion, it departed from the ecclesiastical structure of the early Christian church. From a pragmatic perspective, they feared that defining papal infallibility would alienate some Catholics, create new difficulties for union with non-Catholics, and provoke interference by governments in ecclesiastical affairs. Those who held this view included most of the German and Austro-Hungarian bishops, nearly half of the Americans, one third of the French, most of the Chaldaeans and Melkites, and a few Armenians. Only a few bishops appear to have had doubts about the dogma itself.
On 24 April 1870, the dogmatic constitution on the Catholic faith was adopted unanimously. The draft presented to the Council on 8 March drew no serious criticism, but a group of 35 English-speaking bishops, who feared that the opening phrase of the first chapter, " ('Holy Roman Catholic Church'), might be construed as favouring the Anglican branch theory, later succeeded in having an additional adjective inserted, so that the final text read: " ('Holy Catholic Apostolic Roman Church'). The constitution thus set forth the teaching of the "Holy Catholic Apostolic Roman Church" on God, revelation and faith.
There was stronger opposition to the draft constitution on the nature of the church, which at first did not include the question of papal infallibility, but the majority party in the council, whose position on this matter was much stronger, brought it forward. It was decided to postpone discussion of everything in the draft except infallibility. The decree did not go forward without controversy; Cardinal , Archbishop of Bologna, proposed adding that the pope is assisted by "the counsel of the bishops manifesting the tradition of the churches". Pius IX rejected Guidi's view of the bishops as witnesses to the tradition, maintaining: "I am the tradition", meaning I am the successor of Peter, the Rock on which Christ chose to build His Church.
On 13 July 1870, a preliminary vote on the section on infallibility was held in a general congregation: 451 voted simply in favour (), 88 against (), and 62 in favour but on condition of some amendment (). This made evident what the final outcome would be, and some 60 members of the opposition left Rome so as not to be associated with approval of the document. The final vote, with a choice only between and , was taken on 18 July 1870, with 433 votes in favour and only 2 against defining as a dogma the infallibility of the pope when speaking . The two votes in opposition were cast by Bishops Aloisio Riccio and Edward Fitzgerald.
The dogmatic constitution states, in chapter 4:9, that the Pope has "full and supreme power of jurisdiction over the whole Church" (chapter 3:9); and that, when he:
None of the bishops who had argued that proclaiming the definition was inopportune refused to accept it. Some Catholics, mainly of German language and largely inspired by the historian Ignaz von Döllinger, formed the separate Old Catholic Church in protest; von Döllinger did not formally join the new group himself.
Discussion of the rest of the document on the nature of the church was to continue when the bishops returned after a summer break. However, in the meanwhile the Franco-Prussian War broke out. With the swift German advance and the capture of Emperor Napoleon III, French troops protecting papal rule in Rome withdrew from the city.
Consequently, on 20 September 1870, one month after the Kingdom of Italy had occupied Rome, Pope Pius IX, who then considered himself a prisoner in the Vatican, issued the bull , adjourning the Council indefinitely. While some proposed to continue the council in the Belgian city of Mechlin, it was never reconvened. The Council was formally closed in 1960, prior to the formation of the Second Vatican Council.

</doc>
<doc id="11391" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11391" title="First Council of the Lateran">
First Council of the Lateran

The First Council of the Lateran was the 9th ecumenical council recognized by the Catholic Church. It was convoked by Pope Callixtus II in December 1122, immediately after the Concordat of Worms. The council sought to: (a) bring an end to the practice of the conferring of ecclesiastical benefices by people who were laymen; (b) free the election of bishops and abbots from secular influence; (c) clarify the separation of spiritual and temporal affairs; (d) re-establish the principle that spiritual authority resides solely in the Church; (e) abolish the claim of the emperors to influence papal elections.
The council convoked by Callixtus II was significant in size: three hundred bishops and more than six hundred abbots assembled at Rome in March, 1123; Callixtus II presided in person. During the Council the decisions of the Concordat of Worms were read and ratified. Various other decisions were promulgated.
The First Lateran Council was called by Pope Callixtus II whose reign began February 1, 1119. It demarcated the end of the Investiture Controversy which had begun before the time of Pope Gregory VII. The issues had been contentious and had continued with unabated bitterness for almost a century. Guido, as he was called before his elevation to the papacy, was the son of William I, Count of Burgundy. He was closely connected with nearly all the royal houses of Europe on both sides of his family. He had been named the papal legate to France by Pope Paschal II. During Guido's tenure in this office, Paschal II yielded to the military threats of Henry V, Holy Roman Emperor, and was induced to issue the Privilegium in the year 1111. By this document the Church gave up much of what had been claimed and subsequently attained by Pope Gregory VII and his Gregorian Reforms.
These concessions did not bring the expected peace but were received with violent reactionary opposition everywhere. Europe had come to expect an end to the Investiture controversy, and was not willing to return to the old days when the Holy Roman Emperor named the pope. The greatest resistance was seen in France and was led by Guido, who still held the office of the papal legate. He had been present in the Lateran Synod of 1112 which had proclaimed the Privilegium of 1111. On his return to France, Guido convoked an assembly of the French and Burgundian bishops at Vienne (1112). There the lay investiture of the clergy (the practice of the king, especially the Holy Roman Emperor naming bishops and the pope) was denounced as heretical. A sentence of excommunication was pronounced against Henry V, who had extorted through violence from the pope the concessions documented in the Privilegium. The agreement was deemed to be opposed to the interests of the Church. The decrees from the assembly of Vienne which denounced the Privilegium were sent to Paschal II with a request for confirmation. Pope Paschal II confirmed these which were received in general terms, on October 20, 1112.
Guido was later created cardinal by Pope Paschal II. The latter did not seem to have been pleased with Guido’s bold and forward attacks upon Henry V, Holy Roman Emperor. On the death of Paschal II, January 21, 1118, Gelasius II was elected pope. He was immediately seized by the Italian allies of Henry V, and on his liberation by the populace fled to Gaeta, where he was crowned. Henry V demanded the confirmation of the "Privilegium" and received no satisfactory reply. He then set about naming Burdinus, the archbishop of Braga, as his own pope. This pope assumed the name Gregory VIII, but came to be known as antipope Gregory VIII. Burdinus had already been deposed and excommunicated because he had crowned Henry V and the Holy Roman Emperor in Rome in 1117.
The excommunication of Bardinus was reiterated in Canon 6 of the document produced by Lateran I. Gelasius II promptly excommunicated the antipope Gregory VIII and Henry V. Gelasius was forced to flee under duress from the army of Henry V, and took refuge in the monastery of Cluny, where he died in January 1119. On the fourth day after the death of Gelasius II, February I, 1119, owing mainly to the exertions of Cardinal Cuno, Guido was elected pope and assumed the title of Callixtus II. He was crowned Pope at Vienne on February 9, 1119.
Because of his close connection with the great royal families of Germany, France, England and Denmark, Callixtus II's papacy was received with much anticipation and celebration throughout Europe. There was a real hope throughout the Continent that the Investiture Controversy might be settled once and for all. In the interest of conciliation, even the papal embassy was received by Henry V, Holy Roman Emperor at Strasburg. However, it soon became clear that Henry was not willing to concede his presumed and ancient right to name the pope and bishops within his kingdom. Perhaps to demonstrate conciliation or because of political necessity, Henry withdrew his support for antipope Gregory VIII.
It was agreed that Henry and Pope Callixtus II would meet at Mousson. On June 8, 1119, Callixtus II held a synod at Toulouse to proclaim the disciplinary reforms he had worked to attain in the French Church. In October, 1119, he opened the council at Reims. Louis VI of France and most of the barons of France attended this council along with more than four hundred bishops and abbots. The Pope was also to meet with Henry V, Holy Roman Emperor at Mousson. However, Henry showed up with an army of thirty thousand men. Callixtus II left Reims for Mousson, but upon learning of the warlike stance of Henry, quickly retreated back to Reims. Here, the Church dealt with issues of simony, concubinage of the clergy.
It was clear by now that Henry was in no mood to reconcile and a compromise with him was not to be had. The Conclave at Reims considered the situation and determined, as an entire Church, to formally excommunicate both Henry V and the antipope Gregory VIII. This occurred on October 30, 1119. While at Reims, Callixtus II tried to effect a settlement with Henry I of England and his brother Robert. This too, met with failure.
Callixtus II was determined to enter Rome which was occupied by the German forces and the antipope Gregory VIII. There was an uprising by the population which forced Gregory VIII to flee the city. After much political and military intrigue in Rome and the southern Italian states, Gregory VIII was formally deposed and Callixtus II was generally recognized as the legitimate Pope in 1121. Having become the established power in Italy, Callixtus II now returned the conflict with Henry V over the issue of lay investiture. Henry had been the recipient of great pressure from many of his barons in Germany over his conflict with the pope. Some had entered into open rebellion. Henry was forced by circumstances to seek a peace with Callstus. Initial negotiations were conducted in October, 1121, at Wurzburg. Lambert, the Cardinal of Ostia was dispatched to convoke a synod at Worms, which began on September 8, 1122. By September 23, the Concordat of Worms, also called the Pactum Calixtinum was concluded. On his side, the emperor gave up his claim to investiture with ring and crosier and granted freedom of election to the episcopal sees.
The elections of bishops could be witnessed by the emperor or his representatives. Callixtus II obtained the right to name bishops throughout Germany, but still did not have this power in much of Burgundy and Italy.
The First Lateran Council was convoked to confirm the Concordat of Worms. The council was most representative with nearly three hundred bishops and six hundred abbots from every part of Catholic Europe being present. It convened on March 18, 1123. Decrees were also passed directed against simony, concubinage among the clergy, church robbers, and forgers of Church documents; the council also reaffirmed indulgences for Crusaders.
In the remaining few years of his life, Callixtus II attempted to secure the status of the Church as it had existed at the end of the reign of Pope Gregory VII. He reorganized and reformed the churches around Rome, canonized Conrad of Constance, condemned the teaching of Peter de Bruis, confirmed the Bishop Thurston of York against the wishes of Henry I of England, and affirmed the freedom of York from the see of Canterbury. Callixtus II died December 13, 1124. He was succeeded by Pope Honorius II. Callixtus II was a strong figure who brought a relative, if tentative peace between Germany and the Church. The Concordat of Worms and the First Lateran Council changed forever the belief in the divine right of kings to name the pope and bishops, and reshaped the nature of church and state forever.
Texts of the First Lateran Council may vary in both wording and numbering of the canons depending on source. In this translation, the precepts of the Concordat of Worms are codified in Canons 2, 4 and 10.
CANON I
Summary. Ordinations and promotions made for pecuniary considerations are devoid of every dignity.
Text. Following the example of the holy fathers and recognizing the obligation of our office, we absolutely forbid in virtue of the authority of the Apostolic See that anyone be ordained or promoted for money in the Church of God. Has anyone thus secured ordination or promotion in the Church, the rank acquired shall be devoid of every dignity.
CANON 2
Summary. Only a priest may be made provost, archpriest, and dean; only a deacon may be archdeacon.
Text. No one except a priest shall be promoted to the dignity of provost, archpriest, or dean;
and no one shall be made archdeacon unless he is a deacon.
CANON 3
Summary. Priests, deacons, and subdeacons are forbidden to live with women other than such as were permitted by the Nicene Council.
Text. We absolutely forbid priests, deacons, and subdeacons to associate with concubines and women, or to live with women other than such as the Nicene Council (canon 3) for reasons of necessity permitted, namely, the mother, sister, or aunt, or any such person concerning whom no suspicion could arise.
CANON 4
Summary. Lay persons, no matter how pious they may be, have no authority to dispose of anything that belongs to the Church.
Text. In accordance with the decision of Pope Stephen, we declare that lay persons, no matter how devout they may be, have no authority to dispose of anything belonging to the Church, but according to the Apostolic canon the supervision of all ecclesiastical affairs belongs to the bishop, who shall administer them conformably to the will of God. If therefore any prince or other layman shall arrogate to himself the right of disposition, control, or ownership of ecclesiastical goods or properties, let him be judged guilty of sacrilege.
CANON 5
Summary. Marriages between blood-relatives are forbidden.
Text. We forbid marriages between blood-relatives because they are forbidden by the divine and secular laws. Those who contract such alliances, as also their offspring, the divine laws not only ostracize but declare accursed, while the civil laws brand them as infamous and deprive them of hereditary rights. We, therefore, following the example of our fathers, declare and stigmatize them as infamous.
CANON 6
Summary. Ordinations by Burdinus and the bishops consecrated by him are invalid.
Text. The ordinations made by the heresiarch Burdinus after his condemnation by the Roman Church, as also those made by the bishops consecrated by him after that point of time, we declare to be invalid.
CANON 7
Summary. No one is permitted to arrogate to himself the episcopal authority in matters pertaining to the cura animarum and the bestowal of benefices.
Text. No archdeacon, archpriest, provost, or dean shall bestow on another the care of souls or the prebends of a church without the decision or consent of the bishop; indeed, as the sacred canons point out, the care of souls and the disposition of ecclesiastical property are vested in the authority of the bishop. If anyone shall dare act contrary to this and arrogate to himself the power belonging to the bishop, let him be expelled from the Church.
CANON 8
Summary. Military persons are forbidden under penalty of anathema to invade or forcibly hold the city of Benevento.
Text. Desiring with the grace of God to protect the recognized possessions of the Holy Roman Church, we forbid under pain of anathema any military person to invade or forcibly hold Benevento, the city of St. Peter. If anyone act contrary to this, let him be anathematized.
CANON 9
Summary. Those excommunicated by one bishop, may not be restored by others.
Text. We absolutely forbid that those who have been excommunicated by their own bishops be received into the communion of the Church by other bishops, abbots, and clerics.
CANON 10
Summary. A bishop consecrated after an uncanonical election shall be deposed.
Text. No one shall be consecrated bishop who has not been canonically elected. If anyone dare do this, both the consecrator and the one consecrated shall be deposed without hope of reinstatement.
CANON 11
Summary. To those who give aid to the Christians in the Orient is granted the remission of sins, and their families and possessions are taken under the protection of the Roman Church.
Text. For effectively crushing the tyranny of the infidels, we grant to those who go to Jerusalem and also to those who give aid toward the defense of the Christians, the remission of their sins and we take under the protection of St. Peter and the Roman Church their homes, their families, and all their belongings, as was already ordained by Pope Urban II. Whoever, therefore, shall dare molest or seize these during the absence of their owners, shall incur excommunication. Those, however, who with a view of going to Jerusalem or to Spain (that is, against the Moors) are known to have attached the cross to their garments and afterward removed it, we command in virtue of our Apostolic authority to replace it and begin the journey within a year from the coming Easter. Otherwise we shall excommunicate them and interdict within their territory all divine service except the baptism of infants and the administration of the last rites to the dying.
CANON 12
Summary. The property of the porticani dying without heirs is not to be disposed of in a manner contrary to the wish of the one deceased.
Text. With the advice of our brethren and of the entire Curia, as well as with the will and consent of the prefect, we decree the abolition of that evil custom which has hitherto prevailed among the porticani, namely, of disposing, contrary to the wish of the one deceased, of the property of porticani dying without heirs; with this understanding, however, that in future the porticani remain faithful to the Roman Church, to us and to our successors.
CANON 13
Summary. If anyone violates the truce of God and after the third admonition does not make satisfaction, he shall be anathematized.
Text. If anyone shall violate the truce of God he shall be admonished three times by the bishop to make satisfaction. If he disregards the third admonition the bishop, either with the advice of the metropolitan or with that of two or one of the neighboring bishops, shall pronounce the sentence of anathema against the violator and in writing denounce him to all the bishops. 
CANON 14
Summary. Laymen are absolutely forbidden to remove offerings from the altars of Roman churches.
Text. Following the canons of the holy fathers, we absolutely and under penalty of anathema forbid laymen to remove the offerings from the altars of the churches of St. Peter, of The Savior (Lateran Basilica), of St. Mary Rotund, in a word, from the altars of any of the churches or from the crosses. By our Apostolic authority we forbid also the fortifying of churches and their conversion to profane uses.
CANON 15
Summary. Counterfeiters of money shall be excommunicated.
Text. Whoever manufactures or knowingly expends counterfeit money, shall be cut off from the communion of the faithful (excommunicated) as one accursed, as an oppressor of the poor and a disturber of the city.
CANON 16
Summary. Robbers of pilgrims and of merchants shall be excommunicated.
Text. If anyone shall dare attack pilgrims going to Rome to visit the shrines of the Apostles and the oratories of other saints and rob them of the things they have with them, or exact from merchants new imposts and tolls, let him be excommunicated till he has made satisfaction.
CANON 17
Summary. Abbots and monks may not have the cura animarum.
Text. We forbid abbots and monks to impose public penances, to visit the sick, to administer extreme unction, and to sing public masses. The chrism, holy oil, consecration of altars, and ordination of clerics they shall obtain from the bishops in whose dioceses they reside.
CANON 18
Summary. The appointment of priests to churches belongs to the bishops, and without their consent they may not receive tithes and churches from laymen.
Text. Priests shall be appointed to parochial churches by the bishops, to whom they shall be responsible for the care of souls and other matters pertaining to them. They are not permitted to receive tithes and churches from laics without the will and consent of the bishops. If they act otherwise, let them be subject to the canonical penalties.
CANON 19
Summary. Taxes paid to bishops by monks since Gregory VII must be continued. Monks may not by prescription acquire the possessions of churches and of bishops.
Text. The tax (servitium) which monasteries and their churches have rendered to the bishops since the time of Gregory VII, shall be continued. We absolutely forbid abbots and monks to acquire by prescription after thirty years the possessions of churches and of shops.
CANON 20
Summary. Churches and their possessions, as well as the person and things connected with them, shall remain safe and unmolested.
Text. Having in mind the example of our fathers and discharging the duty of our pastoral office, we decree that churches and their possessions, as well as the persons connected with them, namely, clerics and monks and their servants (conversi), also the laborers and the things they use, shall remain safe and unmolested. If anyone shall dare act contrary to this and, recognizing his crime, does not within the space of thirty days make proper amends, let him be cut off from the Church and anathematized.
CANON 21
Summary. Clerics in major orders may not marry, and marriages already contracted must be dissolved.
Text. We absolutely forbid priests, deacons, subdeacons, and monks to have concubines or to contract marriage. We decree in accordance with the definitions of the sacred canons, that marriages already contracted by such persons must be dissolved, and that the persons be condemned to do penance.
CANON 22
Summary. The alienation of possessions of the exarchate of Ravenna is condemned, and the Ordinaries made by the intruders are invalid.
Text. The alienation that has been made especially by Otto, Guido, Jerome, and perhaps by Philip of possessions of the exarchate of Ravenna, we condemn. In a general way we declare invalid the alienations in whatever manner made by bishops and abbots whether intruded or canonically elected, and also the ordinations conferred by them whether with the consent of the clergy of the Church or simoniacally. We also absolutely forbid any cleric in any way to alienate his prebend or any ecclesiastical benefice. If he has presumed to do this in the past or shall presume to do so in the future, his action shall be null and he shall be subject to the canonical penalties .
Lateran I was the first of four Lateran Councils between the years 1123–1215. The first was not very original in its concept, nor one called to meet a pressing theological question. For the most part, Pope Callixtus II summoned the council to ratify the various meetings and concords which had been occurring in and around Rome for several years. The most pressing issue was that of the Investiture Controversy which had consumed nearly a century of contention and open warfare. At the heart of the question was the ancient right of the Holy Roman Emperor to name the pope as well as bishops and priests. These would be invested with some secular symbol such as a sword or scepter and the spiritual authority represented by a ring, miter and crosier. To an illiterate population, it appeared the bishop or abbot was now the king’s inferior and owed his position to the king. This issue came to the fore in the first part of the eleventh century when Rome and the pope sought autonomy from the Holy Roman Emperor. It had been a central issue in the reign of Pope Gregory VII and his battles with Henry IV, Holy Roman Emperor. The issue was never settled. Years of teaching by Roman trained priests and bishops in Germany had led to an educated generation which rejected the idea of divine right of kings. 
The Third Lateran Council and the Fourth Lateran Council are generally considered to be of much greater significance than Lateran I. However, Lateran I marked the first time a general and large Council had been held in the West. All previous Councils had been in the East and dominated by Greek theologians and philosophers.
In the struggle between Stephen of England and Matilda, the daughter of Henry I of England, the English Church slipped away from the close control the Normans had exercised. Stephen was forced to make many concessions to the Church to gain some element of political control. Historians have largely considered his rule to be a disaster, calling it The Anarchy.
Because of political necessity, the Holy Roman Emperors were restrained from directly naming bishops in the kingdom. In practicality, the process continued to a certain extent. The issue of separation of church and state was simply recast in a different direction. Of all the Gregorian Reforms which were embodied by Lateran I, celibacy of the clergy was the most successful. Simony was curtailed. As time progressed, secular interference into the politics of the Church was seen to continue, albeit in different ways from that of the Investiture Controversy.
It has been argued by some historians that the Concordat of Worms and its reiteration by Lateran I were little more than face saving measures by the Church. Henry V, Holy Roman Emperor continued to name bishops within his kingdom. His control over the papacy was definitely abated. At the time, the Concordat of Worms was proclaimed as a great victory for Henry V inside the Holy Roman Empire. It did serve to constrain much of the most recent warfare in and outside the empire. In the end, Henry V died the monarch of a much diminished kingdom.

</doc>
<doc id="11393" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11393" title="Four Noble Truths">
Four Noble Truths

In Buddhism, the Four Noble Truths Pali: "cattāri ariyasaccāni" Sanskrit: "catvāri āryasatyāni"; , "The four Arya satyas") are "the truths of the Noble Ones", the truths or realities for the "spiritually worthy ones". The truths are:
They are traditionally identified as the first teaching given by the Buddha, and considered one of the most important teachings in Buddhism.
The four truths appear in many grammatical forms in the ancient Buddhist texts, and they have both a symbolic and a propositional function. Symbolically, they represent the awakening and liberation of the Buddha, and of the potential for his followers to reach the same religious experience as him. As propositions, the Four Truths are a conceptual framework that appear in the Pali canon and early Hybrid Sanskrit Buddhist scriptures. They are a part of the broader "network of teachings" (the ""dhamma" matrix"), which have to be taken together. They provide a conceptual framework for introducing and explaining Buddhist thought, which has to be personally understood or "experienced".
As a proposition, the four truths defy an exact definition, but refer to and express the basic orientation of Buddhism: unguarded sensory contact gives rise to craving and clinging to impermanent states and things, which are "dukkha", "incapable of satisfying" and painful. This craving keeps us caught in "samsara", "wandering," usually interpreted as the endless cycle of repeated rebirth, and the continued "dukkha" that comes with it. There is a way to end this cycle, namely by attaining "nirvana", cessation of craving, whereafter rebirth and the accompanying "dukkha" will no longer arise again. This can be accomplished by following the eightfold path, confining our automatic responses to sensory contact by restraining oneself, cultivating discipline and wholesome states, and practicing mindfulness and "dhyana" (meditation).
The function of the four truths, and their importance, developed over time and the Buddhist tradition slowly recognized them as the Buddha's first teaching. This tradition was established when "prajna", or "liberating insight", came to be regarded as liberating in itself, instead of or in addition to the practice of "dhyana". This "liberating insight" gained a prominent place in the sutras, and the four truths came to represent this liberating insight, as a part of the enlightenment story of the Buddha. 
The four truths grew to be of central importance in the Theravada tradition of Buddhism by about the 5th-century CE, which holds that the insight into the four truths is liberating in itself. They are less prominent in the Mahayana tradition, which sees the higher aims of insight into "sunyata", emptiness, and following the Bodhisattva path as central elements in their teachings and practice. The Mahayana tradition reinterpreted the four truths to explain how a liberated being can still be "pervasively operative in this world". Beginning with the exploration of Buddhism by western colonialists in the 19th century and the development of Buddhist modernism, they came to be often presented in the west as the central teaching of Buddhism, sometimes with novel modernistic reinterpretations very different from the historic Buddhist traditions in Asia.
The four truths are best known from their presentation in the "Dhammacakkappavattana Sutta" text, which contains two sets of the four truths, while various other sets can be found in the Pāli Canon, a collection of scriptures in the Theravadan Buddhist tradition. The full set, which is most commonly used in modern expositions, contains grammatical errors, pointing to multiple sources for this set and translation problems within the ancient Buddhist community. Nevertheless, they were considered correct by the Pali tradition, which did not correct them.
According to the Buddhist tradition, the "Dhammacakkappavattana Sutta", "Setting the Wheel of Dhamma in Motion", contains the first teachings that the Buddha gave after attaining full awakening, and liberation from rebirth. According to L. S. Cousins, many scholars are of the view that "this discourse was identified as the first sermon of the Buddha only at a later date," and according to professor of religion Carol S. Anderson the four truths may originally not have been part of this sutta, but were later added in some versions. Within this discourse, the four noble truths are given as follows ("bhikkus" is normally translated as "Buddhist monks"):
According to this sutra, with the complete comprehension of these four truths release from "samsara", the cycle of rebirth, was attained:
The comprehension of these four truths by his audience leads to the opening of the "Dhamma Eye", that is, the attainment of right vision:
According to K.R. Norman, the basic set is as follows:
According to K. R. Norman, the Pali canon contains various shortened forms of the four truths, the "mnemonic set", which were "intended to remind the hearer of the full form of the NTs." The earliest form of the mnemonic set was "dukkham samudayo nirodho magga", without the reference to the Pali terms "sacca" or "arya", which were later added to the formula. The four mnemonic terms can be translated as follows:
According to L.S. Cousins, the four truths are not restricted to the well-known form where "dukkha" is the subject. Other forms take "the world, the arising of the world" or "the āsavas, the arising of the āsavas" as their subject. According to Cousins, "the well-known form is simply shorthand for all of the forms." "The world" refers to the saṅkhāras, that is, all compounded things, or to the six sense spheres.
The various terms all point to the same basic idea of Buddhism, as described in five skandhas and twelve nidānas. In the five skandhas, sense-contact with objects leads to sensation and perception; the saṅkhāra ('inclinations', c.q. craving etc.) determine the interpretation of, and the response to, these sensations and perceptions, and affect consciousness in specific ways. The "twelve nidānas" describe the further process: craving and clinging ("upādāna") lead to "bhava" (becoming) and "jāti" (birth). 
In the orthodox interpretation, "bhava" is interpreted as "kammabhava", that is , "karma", while "jāti" is interpreted as rebirth: from sensation comes craving, from craving comes karma, from karma comes rebirth. The aim of the Buddhist path is to reverse this causal chain: when there is no (response to) sensation, there is no craving, no karma, no rebirth. In Thai Buddhism, "bhava" is interpreted as behavior which serves craving and clinging, while "jāti" is interpreted as the repeated birth of the ego or self-sense, which perpetuates the process of self-serving responses and actions.
The Pali terms "ariya sacca" (Sanskrit: "arya satya") are commonly translated as "noble truths". This translation is a convention started by the earliest translators of Buddhist texts into English. According to K.R. Norman, this is just one of several possible translations. According to Paul Williams,
The term "arya" was later added to the four truths. The term "ariya" (Sanskrit: "arya") can be translated as "noble", "not ordinary", "valuable", "precious". "pure". Paul Williams:
The term "sacca" (Sanskrit: "satya") is a central term in Indian thought and religion. It is typically translated as "truth"; but it also means "that which is in accord with reality", or "reality". According to Rupert Gethin, the four truths are "four 'true things' or 'realities' whose nature, we are told, the Buddha finally understood on the night of his awakening." They function as "a convenient conceptual framework for making sense of Buddhist thought." According to K. R. Norman, probably the best translation is "the truth[s] of the noble one (the Buddha)". It is a statement of how things are seen by a Buddha, how things really are when seen correctly. It is the truthful way of seeing. Through not seeing things this way, and behaving accordingly, we suffer.
According to Anderson, the four truths have both a symbolic and a propositional function:
As a symbol, they refer to the possibility of awakening, as represented by the Buddha, and are of utmost importance:
As a proposition, they are part of the matrix or "network of teachings", in which they are "not particularly central", but have an equal place next to other teachings, describing how release from craving is to be reached. A long recognized feature of the Theravada canon is that it lacks an "overarching and comprehensive structure of the path to "nibbana"." The sutras form a network or matrix, and the four truths appear within this "network of teachings", which have to be taken together. Within this network, "the four noble truths are one doctrine among others and are not particularly central", but are a part of "the entire "dhamma" matrix". The four noble truths are set and learnt in that network, learning "how the various teachings intersect with each other", and refer to the various Buddhist techniques, which are all explicitly and implicitly part of the passages which refer to the four truths. According to Anderson,
As a proposition, the four truths defy an exact definition, but refer to and express the basic orientation of Buddhism: sensory contact gives rise to clinging and craving to temporary states and things, which is ultimately unsatisfactory and painful, "dukkha", and sustains "samsara", the repeated cycle of "bhava" (becoming, habitual tendencies) and "jāti" ("birth", interpreted as either rebirth, the coming to be of a new existence; or as the arising of the sense of self as a mental phenomenon).
By following the Buddhist path, craving and clinging can be confined, peace of mind and real happiness
can be attained, and the repeated cycle of repeated becoming and birth will be stopped.
The truth of "dukkha", "incapable of satisfying", "painful", is the basic insight that "samsara", life in this "mundane world", with its clinging and craving to impermanent states and things" is "dukkha", unsatisfactory and painful. We expect happiness from states and things which are impermanent, and therefore cannot attain real happiness.
The truth of "samudaya", "arising", "coming together", or "dukkha-samudaya", the origination or arising of "dukkha", is the truth that repeated life in this world, and its associated "dukkha" arises, or continues, with taṇhā, "thirst", craving for and clinging to these impermanent states and things.
The truth of "nirodha", "cessation," "suppression," "renouncing," "letting go", or "dukkha-nirodha", the cessation of "dukkha", is the truth that "dukkha" ceases, or can be confined, when one renounces or confines craving and clinging, and nirvana is attained. "Nirvana" refers to the moment of attainment itself, and the resulting peace of mind and happiness ("khlesa-nirvana"), but also to the final dissolution of the five skandhas at the time of death ("skandha-nirvana" or "parinirvana"); in the Theravada-tradition, it also refers to a transcendental reality which is "known at the moment of awakening". According to Gethin, "modern Buddhist usage tends to restrict 'nirvāṇa' to the awakening experience and reserve 'parinirvāṇa' for the death experience. When "nirvana" is attained, no more karma is being produced, and rebirth and dissatisfaction will no longer arise again. Cessation is "nirvana", "blowing out", and peace of mind. Joseph Goldstein explains:
The truth of "magga", refers to the path to the cessation of, or liberation from "dukkha". By following the Noble Eightfold Path, to "moksha", liberation, restraining oneself, cultivating discipline, and practicing mindfulness and meditation, one starts to disengage from craving and clinging to impermanent states and things, and rebirth and dissatisfaction will be ended. The term "path" is usually taken to mean the Noble Eightfold Path, but other versions of "the path" can also be found in the Nikayas. The Theravada tradition regards insight into the four truths as liberating in itself.
The well-known eightfold path consists of the understanding that this world is fleeting and unsatisfying, and how craving keeps us tied to this fleeting world; a friendly and compassionate attitude to others; a correct way of behaving; mind-control, which means not feeding on negative thoughts, and nurturing positive thoughts; constant awareness of the feelings and responses which arise; and the practice of "dhyana", meditation. The tenfold path adds the right (liberating) insight, and liberation from rebirth.
The four truths are to be internalised, and understood or "experienced" personally, to turn them into a lived reality.
The four truths describe "dukkha" and its ending as a means to reach peace of mind in this life, but also as a means to end rebirth.
According to Geoffrey Samuel, "the Four Noble Truths [...] describe the knowledge needed to set out on the path to liberation from rebirth." By understanding the four truths, one can stop this clinging and craving, attain a pacified mind, and be freed from this cycle of rebirth and redeath. Patrick Olivelle explains that moksha is a central concept in Indian religions, and "literally means freedom from samsara." Melvin E. Spiro further explains that "desire is the cause of suffering because desire is the cause of rebirth." When desire ceases, rebirth and its accompanying suffering ceases. Peter Harvey explains:
The last sermon, the "Maha-parinibbana Sutta" (Last Days of the Buddha, Digha Nikaya 16)", states it as follows:
According to Bhikkhu Buddhadasa, "birth" does refer not to physical birth and death, but to the birth and death of our self-concept, the "emergence of the ego". According to Buddhadhasa,
Some contemporary teachers tend to explain the four truths psychologically, by taking "dukkha" to mean mental anguish in addition to the physical pain of life, and interpreting the four truths as a means to attain happiness in this life. In the contemporary Vipassana movement that emerged out of the Theravada Buddhism, freedom and the "pursuit of happiness" have become the main goals, not the end of rebirth, which is hardly mentioned in their teachings.
Yet, though freedom and happiness is a part of the Buddhist teachings, these words refer to something different in traditional Asian Buddhism. According to Gil Fronsdal, "when Asian teachers do talk about freedom, it is primarily in reference to what one is free from – that is, from greed, hate, delusion, grasping, attachment, wrong view, self, and most significantly, rebirth". "Nibbana" is the final freedom, and it has no purpose beyond itself. In contrast, freedom in the creative modern interpretation of Four Noble Truths and the Eightfold Path means living happily and wisely, "without drastic changes in lifestyle". Such freedom and happiness is not the goal of Four Noble Truths and related doctrines within traditional Buddhism, but the vipassana teachings in the West make no reference to traditional Theravada doctrines, instead they present only the pragmatic and experiential goals in the form of therapy for the audience's current lives. The creative interpretations are driven in part because the foundational premises of Buddhism do not make sense to audiences outside of Asia. According to Spiro, "the Buddhist message is not simply a psychological message", but an eschatological message.
According to Anderson, "the four truths are recognized as perhaps the most important teaching of the Buddha." Yet, as early as 1935 Caroline Rhys Davids wrote that for a teaching so central to Theravada Buddhism, it was missing from critical passages in the Pali canon. According to Gethin, the four truths and the eightfold path are only two lists of "literally hundreds of similar lists covering the whole range of the theory and practice of ancient Buddhism." The position of the four truths within the canon raises questions, and has been investigated throughout the 19th and 20th centuries.
According to academic scholars, inconsistencies in the oldest texts may reveal developments in the oldest teachings. While the Theravada-tradition holds that the Sutta Pitaka is "the definitive recension of the Buddha-word", and Theravadins argue that it is likely that the sutras date back to the Buddha himself, in an unbroken chain of oral transmission, academic scholars have identified many such inconsistencies, and tried to explain them. Information of the oldest teachings of Buddhism, such as on the Four Noble Truths, has been obtained by analysis of the oldest texts and these inconsistencies, and are a matter of ongoing discussion and research. According to Schmithausen, three positions held by scholars of Buddhism can be distinguished regarding the possibility to retain knowledge of the oldest Buddhism:
According to Bronkhorst, the four truths may already have been formulated in earliest Buddhism, but did not have the central place they acquired in later buddhism. According to Anderson, only by the time of the commentaries, in the fifth century CE, did the four truths come to be identified in the Theravada tradition as the central teaching of the Buddha. According to Anderson,
According to Feer and Anderson, the four truths probably entered the Sutta Pitaka from the Vinaya, the rules for monastic order. They were first added to enlightenment-stories which contain the Four Jhanas, replacing terms for "liberating insight". From there they were added to the biographical stories of the Buddha.
Scholars have noted inconsistencies in the presentations of the Buddha's enlightenment, and the Buddhist path to liberation, in the oldest sutras. They offer that these inconsistencies show that the Buddhist teachings evolved, either during the lifetime of the Buddha, or thereafter. According to the Japanese scholar Ui, the four truths are not the earliest representation of the Buddha's enlightenment. Instead, they are a rather late theory on the content of the Buddha's enlightenment. According to Vetter and Bronkhorst, the earliest Buddhist path consisted of a set of practices which culminate in the practice of "dhyana", leading to a calm of mind and awareness (mindfulness) which according to Vetter "is" the liberation which is being sought. Later on, "liberating insight" came to be regarded as equally liberating. This "liberating insight" came to be exemplified by "prajna", or the insight in the "four truths", but also by other elements of the Buddhist teachings. According to Vetter and Bronkhorst, this growing importance of "liberating insight" was a response to other religious groups in India, which held that a liberating insight was indispensable for "moksha", liberation from rebirth. This change is reflected in the canon, where, according to Bronkhorst,
According to Vetter and Bonkhorst, the ideas on what exactly constituted this "liberating insight" was not fixed but developed over time. According to Bronkhorst, in earliest Buddhism the four truths did not serve as a description of "liberating insight". Initially the term "prajna" served to denote this "liberating insight". Later on, "prajna" was replaced in the suttas by the "four truths". This happened in those texts where practicing the four jhanas preceded the attainment of "liberating insight", and where this practice of the four jhanas then culminates in "liberating insight". This "liberating insight" came to be defined as "insight into the four truths", which is presented as the "liberating insight" which constituted the awakening, or "enlightenment" of the Buddha. When he understood these truths he was "enlightened" and liberated, as reflected in Majjhima Nikaya 26:42: "his taints are destroyed by his seeing with wisdom."
Bronkhorst points to an inconsistency, noting that the four truths refer here to the eightfold path as the means to gain liberation, while the attainment of insight into the four truths is portrayed as liberating in itself. According to Bronkhorst, this is an inconsistency which reveals a change which took place over time in the composition of the sutras. An example of this substitution, and its consequences, is Majjhima Nikaya 36:42–43, which gives an account of the awakening of the Buddha.
According to Schmithausen, the four truths were superseded by "pratityasamutpada", and still later, in the Hinayana schools, by the doctrine of the non-existence of a substantial self or person.. Schmithausen further states that still other descriptions of this "liberating insight" exist in the Buddhist canon:
In contrast, Thanissaro Bikkhu presents the view that the four truths, pratityasamutpada and anatta are inextricably intertwined.
In their symbolic function, the sutras present the insight into the four truths as the culmination of the Buddha's path to awakening. In the "Vinayapitaka" and the "Sutta-pitaka" they have the same symbolic function, in a reenactment by his listeners of the Buddha's awakening by attaining the "dhamma-eye". In contrast, here this insight serves as the starting point to path-entry for his audience. These sutras present a repeated sequence of events:
Yet, in other sutras, where the four truths have a propositional function, the comprehension of the four truths destroys the corruptions. They do so in combination with the practice of the "jhanas" and the attainment of the divine eye, with which past lives and the working of rebirth are being seen.
According to Anderson, following Schmithausen and Bronkhorst, these two presentations give two different models of the path to liberation, reflecting their function as a symbol and as a proposition. Most likely, the four truths were first associated with the culmination of the path in the destruction of the "āsavās", where they substituted the unspecified "liberating insight"; as the canon developed, they became more logically associated with the beginning of the Buddhist path.
According to Anderson there is a strong tendency within scholarship to present the four truths as the most essential teaching of Buddhism. According to Anderson, the four truths have been simplified and popularized in western writings, due to "the colonial project of gaining control over Buddhism." According to Crosby, the Buddhist teachings are reduced to a "simple, single rationalized account", which has parallels in the reinterpretation of the Buddha in western literature.
The presentation of the four truths as one of the most important teachings of the Buddha "has been [done] to reduce the four noble truths to a teaching that is accessible, pliable, and therefore readily appropriated by non-Buddhists." There is a great variety of teachings in the Buddhist literature, which may be bewildering for those who are unaware of this variety. The four truths are easily accessible in this regard, and are "readily [understood] by those outside the Buddhist traditions." For example Walpola Rahula's "What the Buddha Taught", a widely used introductory text for non-Buddhists, uses the four truths as a framework to present an overview of the Buddhist teachings.
According to Harris, the British in the 19th century crafted new representations of Buddhism and the Buddha. 19th century missionaries studied Buddhism, to be more effective in their missionary efforts. The Buddha was de-mystified, and reduced from a "superhuman" to a "compassionate, heroic human", serving "western historical method and the missionary agenda of situating the Buddha firmly below the divine." The four truths were discovered by the British by reading the Buddhist texts, and were not immediately granted the central position they later received.
The writings of British missionaries show a growing emphasis on the four truths as being central to Buddhism, with somewhat different presentations of them. This colonial project had a strong influence on some strands of Buddhism, culminating in so-called Protestant Buddhism, which incorporated several essentially Protestant attitudes regarding religion, such as the emphasis on written texts. According to Gimello, Rahula's book is an example of this Protestant Budhism, and "was created in an accommodating response to western expectations, and in nearly diametrical opposition to Buddhism as it had actually been practised in traditional Theravada."
Hendrik Kern proposed in 1882 that the model of the four truths may be an analogy with classical Indian medicine, in which the four truths function as a medical diagnosis, and the Buddha is presented as a physician. Kern's analogy became rather popular, but "there is not sufficient historical evidence to conclude that the Buddha deliberately drew upon a clearly defined medical model for his fourfold analysis of human pain."
According to Anderson, those scholars who did not place the four truths at the center of Buddhism, either "located the four truths in a fuller reading of the Theravada canon and the larger context of South Asian literature", or "located the teaching within an experience of Buddhism as practiced in a contemporary setting." According to Anderson, "these autors suggest a more complex reading of the four noble truths than those who locate the teaching as the key to or as a crucial element within the grand scheme of Buddhism."
The developing Buddhist tradition inserted the four truths, using various formulations, at various sutras. They are being used both as a symbol of all dhammas and the Buddha's awakening, and as a set of propositions which function within a matrix of teachings. According to Anderson, there is no single way to understand the teachings; one teaching may be used to explain another teaching, and vice versa. The teachings form a network, which should be apprehended as such to understand how the various teachings intersect with each other.
The "Mahasaccaka Sutta" ("The Greater Discourse to Saccaka", Majjhima Nikaya 36) gives one of several versions of the Buddha's way to liberation. He attains the three knowledges, namely knowledge of his former lifes, knowledge of death and rebirth, and knowledge of the destruction of the taints, the Four Noble Truths. After going through the four dhyanas, and gaining the first two knowledges, the story proceeds:
Bronkhorst dismisses the first two knowledges as later additions, and proceeds to notice that the recognition of the intoxicants is modelled on the four truths. According to Bronkhorst, those are added the bridge the original sequence of "I directed my mind to the knowledge of the destruction of the intoxicants. My mind was liberated", which was interrupted by the addition of the four truths. Bronkhorst points out that those do not fit here, since the four truths culminate in the knowledge of the path to be followed, while the Buddha himself is already liberated at that point.
According to the Buddhist tradition, the first talk of Gautama Buddha after he attained enlightenment is recorded in the "Dhammacakkappavattana Sutta" ("Setting in Motion the Wheel of Dhamma", Samyutta Nikaya 56.11). The "Dhammacakkappavattana Sutta" provides details on three stages in the understanding of each truth, for a total of twelve insights. The three stages for understanding each truth are:
These three stages of understanding are emphasized particularly in the Theravada tradition, but they are also recognized by some contemporary Mahayana teachers.
According to Cousins, many scholars are of the view that "this discourse was identified as the first sermon of the Buddha only at a later date." According to Stephen Batchelor, the "Dhammacakkappavattana Sutta" contains incongruities, and states that
According to Bronkhorst this "first sermon" is recorded in several sutras, with important variations. In the Vinaya texts, and in the "Dhammacakkappavattana Sutta" which was influenced by the Vinaya texts, the four truths are included, and Kondañña is enlightened when the "vision of Dhamma" arises in him: "whatever is subject to origination is all subject to cessation." Yet, in the "Ariyapariyesanā Sutta" ("The Noble Search", Majjhima Nikaya 26) the four truths are not included, and the Buddha gives the five ascetics personal instructions in turn, two or three of them, while the others go out begging for food. The versions of the "first sermon" which include the four truths, such as the "Dhammacakkappavattana Sutta", omit this instruction, showing that
According to Bronkhorst, this indicates that the four truths were later added to earlier descriptions of liberation by practicing the four dhyanas, which originally was thought to be sufficient for the destruction of the arsavas. Anderson, following Norman, also thinks that the four truths originally were not part of this sutta, and were later added in some versions.
According to Bronkhorst, the "twelve insights" are probably also a later addition, born out of unease with the substitution of the general term "prajna" for the more specific "four truths".
According to the Buddhist tradition, the "Maha-parinibbana Sutta" (Last Days of the Buddha, Digha Nikaya 16) was given near the end of the Buddha's life. This sutta "gives a good general idea of the Buddha's Teaching:"
The "Maha-salayatanika Sutta", Majjhima Nikaya 149:3 plus 149:9, give an alternative presentation of the four truths:
The Ekavyāvahārika sect emphasized the transcendence of the Buddha, asserting that he was eternally enlightened and essentially non-physical. According to the Ekavyāvahārika, the words of the Buddha were spoken with one transcendent meaning, and the Four Noble Truths are to be understood simultaneously in one moment of insight. According to the Mahīśāsaka sect, the Four Noble Truths should be meditated upon simultaneously.
According to Carol Anderson, the four truths have "a singular position within the Theravada canon and tradition." The Theravada tradition regards insight in the four truths as liberating in itself. As Walpola Rahula states, "when the Truth is seen, all the forces which feverishly produce the continuity of samsara in illusion become calm and incapable of producing any more karma-formations [...] he is free from [...] the 'thirst' for becoming." This liberation can be attained in one single moment, when the four truths are understood together. Within the Theravada tradition, great emphasis is placed upon reading and contemplating "The Discourse That Sets Turning the Wheel of Truth", and other suttas, as a means to study the four noble truths and put them into practice. For example, Ajahn Sumedho states: 
Within the Theravada-tradition, three different stances on "nirvana" and the question what happens with the "Arhat" after death can be found. "Nirvana" refers to the cessation of the defilements and the resulting peace of mind and happiness ("khlesa-nirvana"); to the final dissolution of the five skandhas at the time of death ("skandha-nirvana" or "parinirvana"); and to a transcendental reality which is "known at the moment of awakening". According to Gethin, "modern Buddhist usage tends to restrict 'nirvāṇa' to the awakening experience and reserve 'parinirvāṇa' for the death experience. According to Geisler and Amano, in the "minimal Theravada interpretation", "nirvana" is a psychological state, which ends with the dissolution of the body and the total extinction of existence. According to Geisler and Amano, the "orthodox Theravada interpretation" is that nirvana is a transcendent reality with which the self unites. According to Bronkhorst, while "Buddhism preached liberation in this life, i.e. before death", there was also a tendency in Buddhism to think of liberation happening after death. According to Bronkhorst, this
According to Walpola Rahula, the cessation of "dukkha" is "nirvana", the "summum bonum" of Buddhism, and is attained in this life, not when one dies. "Nirvana" is "perfect freedom, peace, tranquility and happiness", and "Absolute Truth", which simply "is". Jayatilleke also speaks of "the attainment of an ultimate reality". According to Bhikkhu Bodhi, the "elimination of craving culminates not only in the extinction of sorrow, anguish and distress, but in the unconditioned freedom of nibbana, which is won with the ending of reapeated rebirth."
According to Spiro, most (lay) Theravada Buddhists do not aspire for "nirvana" and total extinction, but for a pleasurable rebirth in heaven. According to Spiro, this presents a "serious conflict" since the Buddhist texts and teaching "describe life as suffering and hold up nirvana as the "summum bonum."" In response to this deviation, "monks and others emphasize that the hope for nirvana is the only legitimate action for Buddhist action." Nevertheless, according to Spiro most Burmese lay Buddhists do not aspire for the extinction of existence which is "nirvana".
According to B.R. Ambedkar, the Indian Buddhist Dalit leader, the four truths were not part of the original teachings of the Buddha, but a later aggregation, due to Hindu influences. According to Ambedkar, total cessation of suffering is an illusion; yet, the Buddhist Middle Path aims at the reduction of suffering and the maximizing of happiness, balancing both sorrow and happiness.
The four truths are less prominent in the Mahayana traditions, which emphasize insight into Śūnyatā and the Bodhisattva path as a central elements in their teachings. If the sutras in general are studied at all, it is through various Mahayana commentaries.
According to Makransky the Mahayana Bodhisattva ideal created tensions in the explanation of the four truths. In the Mahayana view, a fully enlightened Buddha does not leave "samsara", but remains in the world out of compassion for all sentient beings. The four truths, which aim at ending "samsara", do not provide a doctrinal basis for this view, and had to be reinterpreted. In the old view, "klesas" and "karma" are the cause of prolonged existence. According to Makransky, "[t]o remove those causes was, at physical death, to extinguish one's conditioned existence, hence to end forever one's participation in the world (Third Truth)." According to Makransky, the question of how a liberated being can still be "pervasively operative in this world" has been "a seminal source of ongoing doctrinal tension over Buddhahood throughout the history of the Mahayana in India and Tibet."
Atisha, in his "Bodhipathapradīpa" ("A Lamp for the Path to Awakening"), which forms the basis for the Lamrim tradition, discerns three levels of motivation for Buddhist practitioners. At the beginning level of motivation, one strives toward a better life in "samsara". At the intermediate level, one strives to a liberation from existence in samsara and the end of all suffering. At the highest level of motivation, one strives after the liberation of all living beings. In his commentary on the text, Tsenshap Serkong Rinpoche explains that the four truths are to be meditated upon as a means of practice for the intermediate level.
According to Geshe Tashi Tsering, within Tibetan Buddhism, the four noble truths are studied as part of the Bodhisattva path. They are explained in Mahayana commentaries such as the "Abhisamayalamkara", a summary of and commentary on the Prajna Paramitra sutras, where they form part of the lower Hinayana teachings. The truth of the path (the fourth truth) is traditionally presented according to a progressive formula of five paths, rather than as the eightfold path presented in Theravada. According to Tsering, the study of the four truths is combined with the study of the sixteen characteristics of the four noble truths.
Some contemporary Tibetan Buddhist teachers have provided commentary on the "Dhammacakkappavattana Sutta" and the noble eightfold path when presenting the dharma to Western students.
Nichiren Buddhism is based on the teaching of the Japanese priest and teacher Nichiren, who believed that the Lotus Sūtra contained the essence of all of Gautama Buddha's teachings. The third chapter of the Lotus Sutra states that the Four Noble Truths was the early teaching of the Buddha, while the Dharma of the Lotus is the "most wonderful, unsurpassed great Dharma". The teachings on the four noble truths are a provisional teaching, which Shakyamuni Buddha taught according to the people’s capacity, while the Lotus Sutra is a direct statement of Shakyamuni’s own enlightenment.
For many western Buddhists, the rebirth doctrine in the Four Noble Truths teaching is a problematic notion. According to Lamb, "Certain forms of modern western Buddhism [...] see it as purely mythical and thus a dispensable notion." According to Coleman, the focus of most vipassana students in the west "is mainly on meditation practice and a kind of down-to-earth psychological wisdom." According to Damien Keown, westerners find "the ideas of karma and rebirth puzzling." According to Gowans, many Western followers and people interested in exploring Buddhism are skeptical and object to the belief in karma and rebirth foundational to the Four Noble Truths. According to Konik,
According to Keown, it is possible to reinterpret the Buddhist doctrines such as the Four Noble Truths, since the final goal and the answer to the problem of suffering is nirvana, and not rebirth. Some Western interpreters have proposed what is sometimes referred to as "naturalized Buddhism". It is devoid of rebirth, karma, nirvana, realms of existence, and other concepts of Buddhism, with doctrines such as the Four Noble Truths reformulated and restated in modernistic terms. This "deflated secular Buddhism" stresses compassion, impermanence, causality, selfless persons, no Boddhisattvas, no nirvana, no rebirth, and a naturalist's approach to well-being of oneself and others.
According to Melford Spiro, this approach undermines the Four Noble Truths, for it does not address the existential question for the Buddhist as to "why live? why not commit suicide, hasten the end of "dukkha" in current life by ending life". In traditional Buddhism, rebirth continues the "dukkha" and the path to cessation of "dukkha" isn't suicide, but the fourth reality of the Four Noble Truths. The "naturalized Buddhism", according to Gowans, is a radical revision to traditional Buddhist thought and practice, and it attacks the structure behind the hopes, needs and rationalization of the realities of human life to traditional Buddhists in East, Southeast and South Asia. According to Keown, it may not be necessary to believe in some of the core Buddhist doctrines to be a Buddhist, but the rebirth, karma, realms of existence and cyclic universe doctrines underpin the Four Noble Truths in Buddhism.
Traditional Buddhist scholars disagree with these modernist Western interpretations. Bhikkhu Bodhi, for example, states that rebirth is an integral part of the Buddhist teachings as found in the sutras, despite the problems that "modernist interpreters of Buddhism" seem to have with it. Thanissaro Bhikkhu, as another example, rejects the "modern argument" that "one can still obtain all the results of the practice without having to accept the possibility of rebirth." He states, "rebirth has always been a central teaching in the Buddhist tradition."
According to Owen Flanagan, the Dalai Lama states that "Buddhists believe in rebirth" and that this belief has been common among his followers. However, the Dalai Lama's belief, adds Flanagan, is more sophisticated than ordinary Buddhists, because it is not the same as reincarnation—rebirth in Buddhism is envisioned as happening without the assumption of an "atman, self, soul", but rather through a "consciousness conceived along the anatman lines". The doctrine of rebirth is considered mandatory in Tibetan Buddhism, and across many Buddhist sects.
According to Christopher Gowans, for "most ordinary Buddhists, today as well as in the past, their basic moral orientation is governed by belief in karma and rebirth". Buddhist morality hinges on the hope of well being in this lifetime or in future rebirths, with nirvana (enlightenment) a project for a future lifetime. A denial of karma and rebirth undermines their history, moral orientation and religious foundations. According to Keown, most Buddhists in Asia do accept these traditional teachings, and seek better rebirth.
The Navayana, a modernistic interpretation of Buddhism by the Indian leader B. R. Ambedkar, rejected much of traditional Buddhism, including the Four Noble Truths, karma and rebirth, thus turning his new religion into a Marxist-oriented vehicle for class struggle and social action. According to Ambedkar, Four Noble Truths was "the invention of wrong-headed monks".

</doc>
<doc id="11396" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11396" title="French Republican calendar">
French Republican calendar

The French Republican calendar (), also commonly called the French Revolutionary calendar ("calendrier révolutionnaire français"), was a calendar created and implemented during the French Revolution, and used by the French government for about 12 years from late 1793 to 1805, and for 18 days by the Paris Commune in 1871. The revolutionary system was designed in part to remove all religious and royalist influences from the calendar, and was part of a larger attempt at decimalisation in France (which also included decimal time of day, decimalisation of currency, and metrication). It was used in government records in France and other areas under French rule, including Belgium, Luxembourg, and parts of the Netherlands, Germany, Switzerland, Malta, and Italy.
The prominent anticlerical atheist Sylvain Maréchal published the first edition of his "Almanach des Honnêtes-gens" (Almanac of Honest People) in 1788. The first month in the almanac is "Mars, ou Princeps" (March, or First), the last month is "Février, ou Duodécembre" (February, or Twelfth). (The months of September [meaning "the seventh"] through December [meaning "the tenth"] are already numeric names, although their meanings do not match their positions in either the Julian or the Gregorian calendar since the Romans added the months January and February to the original ten-month March to December year of King Romulus.) The lengths of the months are the same as those in the Gregorian calendar; however, the 10th, 20th, and 30th are singled out of each month as the end of a "décade" (group of ten). Individual days were assigned, instead of to the traditional saints, to noteworthy people. Later editions of the almanac would switch to the Republican Calendar.
The days of the French Revolution and Republic saw many efforts to sweep away various trappings of the "Ancien Régime" (the old feudal monarchy); some of these were more successful than others. The new Republican government sought to institute, among other reforms, a new social and legal system, a new system of weights and measures (which became the metric system), and a new calendar. Amid nostalgia for the ancient Roman Republic, the theories of the Enlightenment were at their peak, and the devisers of the new systems looked to nature for their inspiration. Natural constants, multiples of ten, and Latin as well as Ancient Greek derivations formed the fundamental blocks from which the new systems were built.
The new calendar was created by a commission under the direction of the politician Charles-Gilbert Romme seconded by Claude Joseph Ferry and Charles-François Dupuis. They associated with their work the chemist Louis-Bernard Guyton de Morveau, the mathematician and astronomer Joseph-Louis Lagrange, the astronomer Joseph Jérôme Lefrançois de Lalande, the mathematician Gaspard Monge, the astronomer and naval geographer Alexandre Guy Pingré, and the poet, actor and playwright Fabre d'Églantine, who invented the names of the months, with the help of André Thouin, gardener at the Jardin des Plantes of the Muséum National d'Histoire Naturelle in Paris. As the rapporteur of the commission, Charles-Gilbert Romme presented the new calendar to the Jacobin-controlled National Convention on 23 September 1793, which adopted it on 24 October 1793 and also extended it proleptically to its epoch of 22 September 1792. It is because of his position as rapporteur of the commission that the creation of the republican calendar is attributed to Romme.
The calendar is frequently named the "French Revolutionary Calendar" because it was created during the Revolution, but this is a slight misnomer. Indeed, there was initially a debate as to whether the calendar should celebrate the Great Revolution, which began in July 1789, or the Republic, which was established in 1792. Immediately following 14 July 1789, papers and pamphlets started calling 1789 year I of Liberty and the following years II and III. It was in 1792, with the practical problem of dating financial transactions, that the legislative assembly was confronted with the problem of the calendar. Originally, the choice of epoch was either 1 January 1789 or 14 July 1789. After some hesitation the assembly decided on 2 January 1792 that all official documents would use the "era of Liberty" and that the year IV of Liberty started on 1 January 1792. This usage was modified on 22 September 1792 when the Republic was proclaimed and the Convention decided that all public documents would be dated Year I of the French Republic. The decree of 2 January 1793 stipulated that the year II of the Republic began on 1 January 1793; this was revoked with the introduction of the new calendar, which set 22 September 1793 as the beginning of year II. The establishment of the Republic was used as the epochal date for the calendar; therefore, the calendar commemorates the Republic, not the Revolution. In France, it is known as the "calendrier républicain" as well as the "calendrier révolutionnaire".
French coins of the period naturally used this calendar. Many show the year () in Arabic numbers, although Roman numerals were used on some issues. Year 11 coins typically have a XI date to avoid confusion with the Roman II.
The French Revolution is usually considered to have ended with the coup of 18 Brumaire, Year VIII (9 November 1799), the coup d'état of Napoleon Bonaparte against the established constitutional regime of the "Directoire".
The Concordat of 1801 re-established the Roman Catholic Church as an official institution in France, although not as the state religion of France. The concordat took effect from Easter Sunday, 28 Germinal, Year XI (8 April 1802); it restored the names of the days of the week to the ones from the Gregorian Calendar, and fixed Sunday as the official day of rest and religious celebration. However, the other attributes of the republican calendar, the months, and years, remained as they were.
The French Republic ended with the coronation of Napoleon I as "Empereur des Français" (Emperor of the French) on 11 Frimaire, Year XIII (2 December 1804), but the republican calendar would remain in place for another year. Napoleon finally abolished the republican calendar with effect from 1 January 1806 (the day after 10 Nivôse Year XIV), a little over twelve years after its introduction. It was, however, used again briefly in the "Journal officiel" for some dates during a short period of the Paris Commune, 6–23 May 1871 (16 Floréal–3 Prairial Year LXXIX).
Years appear in writing as Roman numerals (usually), with epoch 22 September 1792, the beginning of the "Republican Era" (the day the French First Republic was proclaimed, one day after the Convention abolished the monarchy). As a result, Roman Numeral I indicates the first year of the republic, that is, the year before the calendar actually came into use. By law, the beginning of each year was set at midnight, beginning on the day the apparent autumnal equinox falls at the Paris Observatory.
There were twelve months, each divided into three ten-day weeks called "décades". The tenth day, "décadi", replaced Sunday as the day of rest and festivity. The five or six extra days needed to approximate the solar or tropical year were placed after the months at the end of each year and called complementary days. This arrangement was an almost exact copy of the calendar used by the Ancient Egyptians, though in their case the beginning of the year was marked by the summer solstice rather than the autumnal equinox.
A period of four years ending on a leap day was to be called a "Franciade". The name "Olympique" was originally proposed but changed to Franciade to commemorate the fact that it had taken the revolution four years to establish a republican government in France.
The leap year was called "Sextile", an allusion to the "bissextile" leap years of the Julian and Gregorian calendars, because it contained a sixth complementary day.
Each day in the Republican Calendar was divided into ten hours, each hour into 100 decimal minutes, and each decimal minute into 100 decimal seconds. Thus an hour was 144 conventional minutes (more than twice as long as a conventional hour), a minute was 86.4 conventional seconds (44% longer than a conventional minute), and a second was 0.864 conventional seconds (13.6% shorter than a conventional second).
Clocks were manufactured to display this decimal time, but it did not catch on. Mandatory use of decimal time was officially suspended 7 April 1795, although some cities continued to use decimal time as late as 1801.
The numbering of years in the Republican Calendar by Roman numerals ran counter to this general decimalization tendency.
The Republican calendar year began the day the autumnal equinox occurred in Paris, and had twelve months of 30 days each, which were given new names based on nature, principally having to do with the prevailing weather in and around Paris. The extra five or six days in the year were not given a month designation, but considered Sansculottides or Complementary Days.
Note: On many printed calendars of Year II (1793–94), the month of "Thermidor" was named "Fervidor" (from Latin "fervidus", "burning hot").
Most of the month names were new words coined from French, Latin, or Greek. The endings of the names are grouped by season. "Dor" means "giving" in Greek.
In Britain, a contemporary wit mocked the Republican Calendar by calling the months: Wheezy, Sneezy and Freezy; Slippy, Drippy and Nippy; Showery, Flowery and Bowery; Hoppy, Croppy and Poppy. The historian Thomas Carlyle suggested somewhat more serious English names in his 1837 work "", namely Vintagearious, Fogarious, Frostarious, Snowous, Rainous, Windous, Buddal, Floweral, Meadowal, Reapidor, Heatidor, and Fruitidor. Like the French originals, they are neologisms suggesting a meaning related to the season.
The month is divided into three "décades" or "weeks" of ten days each, named simply:
Décades were abandoned at the changeover from Germinal to Floréal an X (20 to 21 April 1802).
The Catholic Church used a calendar of saints, which named each day of the year after an associated saint. To reduce the influence of the Church, Fabre d'Églantine introduced a Rural Calendar in which each day of the year had a unique name associated with the rural economy, stated to correspond to the time of year. Every "décadi" (ending in 0) was named after an agricultural tool. Each "quintidi" (ending in 5) was named for a common animal. The rest of the days were named for "grain, pasture, trees, roots, flowers, fruits" and other plants, except for the first month of winter, Nivôse, during which the rest of the days were named after minerals.
Five extra days – six in leap years – were national holidays at the end of every year. These were originally known as "les sans-culottides" (after "sans-culottes"), but after year III (1795) as "les jours complémentaires":
Below are the Gregorian dates each Republican year ("an" in French) began while the calendar was in effect.
The calendar was abolished in the year XIV (1805). After this date, opinions seem to differ on the method by which the leap years would have been determined if the calendar were still in force. There are at least four hypotheses used to convert dates from the Gregorian calendar:
The following table shows when several years of the Republican Era begin on the Gregorian calendar, according to each of the four above methods:
For this calendar, the Romme method of calculating leap years is used. Other methods may differ by one day. Time may be cached and therefore not accurate. Decimal time is according to Paris meantime, which is 9 minutes 21 seconds (6.49 decimal minutes) ahead of Greenwich Mean Time. (This tool calibrates the time, if calibration is desired.)
Leap years in the calendar are a point of great dispute, due to the contradicting statements in the establishing decree stating:
and:
These two specifications are incompatible, as leap years defined by the autumnal equinox in Paris do not recur on a regular four-year schedule. Thus, the years III, VII, and XI were observed as leap years, and the years XV and XX were also planned as such, even though they were five years apart.
A fixed arithmetic rule for determining leap years was proposed in the name of the Committee of Public Education by Gilbert Romme on 19 Floréal An III (8 May 1795). The proposed rule was to determine leap years by applying the rules of the Gregorian calendar to the years of the French Republic (years IV, VIII, XII, etc. were to be leap years) except that year 4000 (the last year of ten 400-year periods) should be a common year instead of a leap year. Shortly thereafter, he was sentenced to the guillotine, and his proposal was never adopted and the original astronomical rule continued, which excluded any other fixed arithmetic rule. The proposal was intended to avoid uncertain future leap years caused by the inaccurate astronomical knowledge of the 1790s (even today, this statement is still valid due to the uncertainty in ΔT). In particular, the committee noted that the autumnal equinox of year 144 was predicted to occur at 11:59:40 pm local apparent time in Paris, which was closer to midnight than its inherent 3 to 4 minute uncertainty.
The calendar was abolished by an act dated 22 Fructidor an XIII (9 September 1805) and signed by Napoleon, which referred to a report by Michel-Louis-Étienne Regnaud de Saint-Jean d'Angély and Jean Joseph Mounier, listing two fundamental flaws.
The report also noted that the 10-day décade was unpopular and had already been suppressed three years earlier in favor of the 7-day week, removing what was considered by some as one of the calendar's main benefits. The 10-day décade was unpopular with laborers because they received only one full day of rest out of ten, instead of one in seven, although they also got a half-day off on the fifth day. It also, by design, conflicted with Sunday religious observances.
Another criticism of the calendar was that despite the poetic names of its months, they are tied to the climate and agriculture of metropolitan France and therefore not applicable to France's overseas territories.
The "18 Brumaire" or "Brumaire" was the coup d'état of Napoléon Bonaparte on 18 Brumaire An VIII (9 November 1799), which many historians consider as the end of the French Revolution. Karl Marx's 1852 essay "The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Napoleon" compares the coup d'état of 1851 of Louis Napoléon unfavorably to his uncle's earlier coup, with the statement "History repeats ... first as tragedy, then as farce".
Another famous revolutionary date is 9 Thermidor An II (27 July 1794), the date the Convention turned against Robespierre, who, along with others associated with the Mountain, was guillotined the following day. Based on this event, the term "Thermidorian" entered the Marxist vocabulary as referring to revolutionaries who destroy the revolution from the inside and turn against its true aims. For example, Leon Trotsky and his followers used this term about Joseph Stalin.
Émile Zola's novel "Germinal" takes its name from the calendar's month of Germinal.
The seafood dish Lobster Thermidor was named after the 1891 play "Thermidor", set during the Revolution.
The French frigates of the "Floréal" class all bear names of Republican months.
The Convention of 9 Brumaire An III, 30 October 1794, established the École normale supérieure. The date appears prominently on the entrance to the school.
The French composer Fromental Halévy was named after the feast day of 'Fromental' in the Revolutionary Calendar, which occurred on his birthday in year VIII (27 May 1799).
Neil Gaiman's "The Sandman" series included a story called "Thermidor" that takes place in that month during the French Revolution.
The "Liavek" shared world series uses a calendar that is a direct translation of the French Republican calendar.
Sarah Monette's "Doctrine of Labyrinths" series borrows the Republican calendar for one of the two competing calendars (their usage splits between social classes) in the fictional city of Mélusine.
Jacques Rivette's 1974 film "Celine and Julie Go Boating" refers to the calendar and its hours of the day.
Alain Tanner's 1979 film "Messidor" presents a haphazard summer road trip of two young women in Switzerland.
The character of Ash Crimson from "The King of Fighters" takes many of his move names from this calendar, such as Pluviose, Ventôse, Thermidor, Fructidor, and Floréal.
In the french version of "Pokémon X and Y", the radial streets of Lumiose City are named "Avenue Floréal" (in English, Vernal Avenue), "Avenue Thermidor" (Estival Avenue), "Avenue Ventôse" (Hibernal Avenue) and "Avenue Vendémiaire" (Autumnal Avenue).

</doc>
